The Project Gutenberg eBook of Father Thames, by Walter Higgins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Father Thames

Author: Walter Higgins

Release Date: January 7, 2022 [eBook #67124]

Language: English

Produced by: Fiona Holmes and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
             Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FATHER THAMES ***



Transcriber’s Notes.


[Illustration: Map of the River Thames from its Source to Windsor]

[Illustration: Map of the River Thames to Windsor]




FATHER THAMES

[Illustration:

Offices of The Port of London Authority

_Frontispiece_]

FATHER THAMES

[Illustration]

BY

WALTER HIGGINS

WELLS GARDNER, DARTON & CO., LTD.

3 & 4 PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, LONDON, E.C.

[Illustration]

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


FATHER THAMES

BOOK I.—LONDON RIVER. BOOK II.—THE GREAT CITY WHICH THE RIVER MADE.
BOOK III.—THE UPPER RIVER.

_This book is also issued in separate parts, as above._




CONTENTS


BOOK I

LONDON RIVER

CHAPTER PAGE

INTRODUCTION: THE RIVER AND ITS VALLEY 1

I. LONDON RIVER 15

II. THE ESTUARY AND ITS TOWNS 31

III. THE MEDWAY AND ITS TOWNS 40

IV. GRAVESEND AND TILBURY 52

V. THE MARSHES 64

VI. WOOLWICH 77

VII. GREENWICH 87

VIII. THE PORT AND THE DOCKS 101


BOOK II

THE GREAT CITY WHICH THE RIVER MADE

I. HOW THE RIVER FOUNDED THE CITY 123

II. HOW THE CITY GREW (ROMAN DAYS) 130

III. HOW THE CITY GREW (SAXON DAYS) 137

IV. HOW THE CITY GREW (NORMAN DAYS) 143

V. THE RIVER’S FIRST BRIDGE 147

VI. HOW THE CITY GREW (IN THE MIDDLE AGES) 157

VII. THE TOWER OF LONDON 166

VIII. HOW FIRE DESTROYED WHAT THE RIVER HAD MADE 181

IX. THE RIVERSIDE AND ITS PALACES 193

X. ROYAL WESTMINSTER—THE ABBEY 209

XI. ROYAL WESTMINSTER—THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT 220

XII. THE RIVERSIDE OF TO-DAY 227


BOOK III

THE UPPER RIVER

I. STRIPLING THAMES 237

II. OXFORD 246

III. ABINGDON, WALLINGFORD, AND THE GORING GAP 263

IV. READING 271

V. HOLIDAY THAMES—HENLEY TO MAIDENHEAD 279

VI. WINDSOR 285

VII. ETON COLLEGE 298

VIII. HAMPTON COURT 305

IX. KINGSTON 317

X. RICHMOND 326

XI. RICHMOND TO WESTMINSTER 332

INDEX 349




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


BOOK I

LONDON RIVER

CHART OF THE THAMES FROM THE SOURCE TO WINDSOR

_Front end papers_

PORT OF LONDON OFFICES _Frontispiece_

PAGE

HOW THE THAMES WAS MADE 4

THE BIRTH OF THE RIVER 8

MOUTH OF THE THAMES 16

THE NORE LIGHTSHIP 17

SHEERNESS 20

TRAINING SHIPS OFF GREENHITHE 22

LONDON’S GIANT GATEWAY 25

THE POOL 27

A THAMES-SIDE WHARF 29

ROCHESTER CASTLE 48

ROCHESTER CATHEDRAL 50

GRAVESEND 54

A RIVER-SIDE CEMENT WORKS 56

TILBURY FORT 58

BUGSBY’S REACH 69

WOOLWICH 79

GREENWICH PARK 88

GREENWICH HOSPITAL 94

THE ROYAL OBSERVATORY 98

DOCKLAND 103

DOCKHEAD, BERMONDSEY 107

WAPPING AND LIMEHOUSE 109

A GIANT LINER 117


BOOK II

THE GREAT CITY WHICH THE RIVER MADE

THE THAMES AT LAMBETH, FROM THE AIR 120, 121

THE LONDON COUNTY HALL 122

ROMAN LONDON (PLAN) 133

BASTION OF ROMAN WALL, CRIPPLEGATE CHURCHYARD 135

THE CONQUEROR’S MARCH ON LONDON (PLAN) 143

OLD LONDON BRIDGE 148

AN ARCH OF OLD LONDON BRIDGE 150

CHAPEL OF ST. THOMAS BECKET ON THE BRIDGE 152

LONDON BRIDGE IN MODERN TIMES 155

BAYNARD’S CASTLE BEFORE THE GREAT FIRE 160

GROUND PLAN OF THE TOWER 168

TRAITOR’S GATE 178

THE MONUMENT 182

OLD ST. PAUL’S (A.D. 1500) 189

THE FLEET RIVER AT BLACKFRIARS (A.D. 1760) 194

OLD TEMPLE BAR, FLEET STREET 201

THE STRAND FROM THE THAMES (SIXTEENTH CENTURY) 202, 203

THE WATER-GATE OF YORK HOUSE 206

THE BANQUETING HALL, WHITEHALL 208

THE RIVER AT THORNEY ISLAND (PLAN) 210

HENRY VII.’S CHAPEL, WESTMINSTER ABBEY 214

WESTMINSTER ABBEY 216

THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT 221

ST. PAUL’S FROM THE SOUTH END OF SOUTHWARK BRIDGE 231


BOOK III

THE UPPER RIVER

THE CASTLE KEEP, OXFORD 236

THAMES HEAD 238

LECHLADE FROM THE FIRST LOCK 240

KELMSCOTT MANOR 242

MAGDALEN TOWER, OXFORD 252

ABINGDON 264

THE GATEHOUSE, READING ABBEY 273

SONNING 280

HENLEY 281

DIAGRAM OF THE THAMES VALLEY TERRACES 283

WINDSOR CASTLE 286

ETON COLLEGE 299

HAMPTON COURT, GARDEN FRONT 306

KINGSTON 322

TEDDINGTON WEIR 324

RICHMOND HILL FROM PETERSHAM MEADOWS 327

FROM THE TERRACE, RICHMOND 330

KEW GARDENS 334

PUTNEY TO MORTLAKE (CHAMPIONSHIP COURSE) 338

FULHAM PALACE 340

RANELAGH 341

THE POWER-STATION, CHELSEA 345

THE LOLLARDS’ TOWER, LAMBETH PALACE 346

CHART OF THE THAMES FROM WINDSOR TO THE NORE _Back end-papers_




FATHER THAMES


INTRODUCTION

_The River and its Valley_


England is not a country of great rivers. No mighty Nile winds lazily
across desert and fertile plains in its three and a half thousand miles
course to the sea; no rushing Brahmaputra plunges headlong down its
slopes, falling two or three miles as it crosses half a continent from
icy mountain-tops to tropical sea-board. In comparison with such as
these England’s biggest rivers are but the tiniest, trickling streams.
Yet, for all that, our little waterways have always meant much to the
land. Tyne, Severn, Humber, Trent, Thames, Mersey, Ouse—all these, with
many smaller but no less well-known streams, have played their part in
the making of England’s history; all these have had much to do with the
building up of her commercial prosperity.

One only of these rivers we shall consider in this book, and that is
old “Father Thames”: as it was and as it is, and what it has meant to
England during two thousand years. In our consideration we shall divide
the River roughly into three quite natural divisions—first, the section
up to the lowest bridge; second, the part just above, the part which
gave the River its chief port and city; third, the upper river.

However, before we consider these three parts in detail, there is one
question which we might well ponder for a little while, a question
which probably has never occurred to more than a few of us; and that is
this: Why was there ever a River Thames at all? To answer it we must
go back—far, far back into the dim past. As you know, this world of
ours is millions of years old, and like most ancient things it has seen
changes—tremendous changes. Its surface has altered from time to time
in amazing fashion. Whole mountain ranges have disappeared from sight,
and valleys have been raised to make fresh highlands. The bed of the
ocean has suddenly or slowly been thrust up, yielding entirely new
continents, while vast areas of land have sunk deep enough to allow the
water to flow in and create new seas. All this we know by the study of
the rocks and the fossil remains buried in them—that is, by the science
of geology.

[Illustration: HOW THE THAMES WAS MADE.]

Now, among many other strange things, geology teaches us that our own
islands were at one time joined on to the mainland of Europe. In those
days there was no English Channel, no North Sea, and no Irish Sea.
Instead, there was a great piece of land stretching from Denmark and
Norway right across to spots miles out beyond the western limits of
Ireland and the northern limits of Scotland. This land, which you will
best understand by looking carefully at the map, p. 4, was crossed by
several rivers, the largest of them one which flowed almost due north
right across what is now the North Sea. This river, as you will see
from the map, was chiefly produced by glaciers of the Alps, and, in
its early stages, took practically the same course as the River Rhine
of these days. As it flowed out across the Dogger district (where now
is the famous Dogger Bank of our North Sea fishermen) it was joined by
a number of tributary rivers, which flowed down eastwards from what
we might call the “back-bone of England”—the range of mountains and
hills which passes down through the centre of our islands. One of these
tributaries was a river which in its early stages flowed along what is
now our own Thames Valley.

In those days everything was on a much grander scale, and this river,
though only a small tributary of the great main continental river,
was a far wider and deeper stream than the Thames which we know. Here
and there along the present-day river valley we can still see in the
contours of the land and in the various rocks evidences of the time
when this bigger stream was flowing. (Of this we shall read more in
Book III.) Thus things were when there came the great surface change
which enabled the water to flow across wide tracts of land and so form
the British Islands, standing out separately from the mainland of
Europe.

All that, of course, happened long, long ago—many thousands of years
before the earliest days mentioned in our history books—at a time about
which we know nothing at all save what we can read in that wonderful
book of Nature whose pages are the rocks and stones of the earth’s
surface.

By the study of these rocks and the fossil remains in them we can
learn just a few things about the life of those days—the strange kinds
of trees which covered the earth from sea to sea, the weird monsters
which roamed in the forests and over the hills. Of _man_ we can learn
very little. We can get some rough idea of when he first appeared in
Britain, and we can tell by the remains preserved in caves, etc., in
some small degree what sort of life he lived. But that is all: the
picture of England in those days is a very dim one.

How and when the prehistoric man of these islands grew to some sort
of civilization we cannot say. When first he learned to till the soil
and grow his crops, to weave rough clothes for himself, to domesticate
certain animals to carry his goods, to make roads along which these
animals might travel, to barter his goods with strangers—all these are
mysteries which we shall probably never solve.

Just this much we can say: prehistoric man probably came to a simple
form of civilization a good deal earlier than is commonly supposed.
As a rule our history books start with the year of Cæsar’s coming (55
B.C.), and treat everything before that date as belonging to absolute
savagery. But there are many evidences which go to show that the
Britons of that time were to some considerable extent a civilized
people, who traded pretty extensively with Gaul (France, that is), and
who knew how to make roads and embankments and, perhaps, even bridges.

As early man grew to be civilized, as he learned to drain the flooded
lands by the side of the stream and turn them from desolate fens and
marshes to smiling productive fields, and as he learned slowly how to
get from the hillsides and the plain the full value of his labour, so
he realized more and more the possibilities of the great river valley.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Thames flows in what may be regarded as an excellent example of a
river-basin. A large area, no less than six thousand square miles, is
enclosed on practically all sides by ranges of hills, generally chalk
hills, which slope down gently into its central plain; and across
this area, from Gloucestershire to the North Sea, for more than two
hundred miles the River winds slowly seawards, joined here and there by
tributaries, which add their share to the stream as they come down from
the encompassing heights.

[Illustration: THE BIRTH OF THE RIVER.]

On the extreme west of the basin lie the Cotswold Hills of
Gloucestershire. Here the Thames is born. The rain which falls on the
hill-tops makes its way steadily into the soil, and is retained there.
Down and down it sinks through the porous limestone and chalk, till
eventually it reaches a layer of impenetrable material—clay, slate, or
stone—through which it can no longer pursue its downward course. Its
only way now is along the upper surface of the stratum of impermeable
material. Thus it comes in time to the places on the hillsides where
the stratum touches the open air (see diagram on p. 8), and there it
gushes forth in the form of springs, which in turn become tiny streams,
some falling westwards down the steep Severn valley, others running
eastwards down the gentler declivity.

At their northern end the Cotswolds sweep round to join Edge Hill; and
then the hill-wall crosses the uplands of that rolling country which
we call the Central Tableland, and so comes to the long stretch of the
East Anglian Heights, passing almost continuously eastward through
Hertfordshire and North Essex to Suffolk. On the south side the ring of
hills sweeps round by way of the Marlborough Downs, and so comes to the
long scarp of the “North” Downs, which make their way eastwards to the
Kentish coast.

Within the limits of this ring of hills the valley lies, not perfectly
flat like an alluvial plain, but gently, very gently, undulating,
seldom rising more than two or three hundred feet above sea-level,
save where that great ridge of chalk—the Chiltern-Marlborough
range—straddles right across the basin at Goring.

Standing on one of the little eminences of the valley we can survey
the scene before us: we can watch the River for many miles winding its
way seawards, and note in all directions the same fertile, flourishing
countryside, with its meadows where the soft-eyed cattle browse on the
rich grass; its warm, brown plough-lands; its rich, golden fields of
wheat, oats, and barley; its pretty orchards and farms close at hand;
its nestling, tidy villages; its little pointed church steeples dotted
everywhere. We can see in the distance, maybe, one or two compact
little towns, for towns always spring up on wide, well-farmed plains,
since the farmers must have proper markets to which to send their
supplies of eggs, butter, cheese, and milk, and proper mills where
their grain may be ground into flour.

It is a pleasant, satisfying prospect—one which suggests industrious,
thrifty farmers reaping the rich reward of their unsparing labours;
and it is an interesting prospect, too, for this same prosperous
countryside, very little altered during half-a-dozen centuries, has
done much to establish and maintain the position of the Thames as _the_
great river of England.

The usefulness of a river to its country depends on several things. In
the first place, it must be able to carry goods—to act as a convenient
highway along which the traffic can descend through the valley towards
the busy places near the mouth. That is to say, it must be navigable to
barges and small boats throughout a considerable portion of its length.
In the second place, there must be the goods to carry. That is to say,
the river must pass through a countryside which can produce in great
quantity things which are needed. In the third place, the chief port of
the river must lie in such a position that it is within comparatively
easy distance of good foreign markets.

Now let us see how these three conditions apply to the River Thames.

Firstly, with regard to the goods themselves. If we take our map of
England, and lay a pencil across it from Bristol to the Wash, we
shall be marking off what has been through the greater part of English
history the boundary of the wealthy portion of Britain, for only in
modern times, since the development of the iron and coal fields, and
the discovery that the damp climate of the north was exactly suited to
the manufacture of textiles, has the great industrial North of England
come into being. England in the Middle Ages, and on till a century or
more ago, was an agricultural country; its wealth lay very largely
in what it grew and what it reared; and the south provided the most
suitable countryside for this sort of production. The consequence
was that the Thames flowed right down through the centre of wealthy
England. All round it were the chalk-ranges on which throve the great
herds of long-fleeced sheep that provided the wonderful wool for which
England was famous, and which was in many respects the main source
of her prosperity. In between the hills were the cornfields and the
orchards. And dotted all down the course at convenient points were
thriving towns, each of which could, as it were, drain off the produce
of the area behind it, and so act as a collecting and forwarding
station for the traffic of the main stream.

The River, too, was quite capable of dealing with the great output,
for it was navigable for barges and small boats as far as Lechlade, a
matter of 150 miles from the mouth, and its tributaries were in most
cases capable of bearing traffic for quite a few miles into the right
and left interior. Moreover, its current at ordinary times was neither
too swift nor too sluggish.

So that, with the wealth produced by the land and the means of
transport provided by the River, the only things needed to make the
Thames one of Europe’s foremost rivers were the markets.

Here again the Thames was fortunate in its situation, for its mouth
stood in an advantageous position facing the most important harbours
of Normandy, Flanders, Holland, and Germany, all within comparatively
easy distance, and all of them ready to take our incomparable wool and
our excellent corn in exchange for the things they could bring us.
Moreover, the tides served in such a way that the double tides of the
Channel and the North Sea made London the most easily reached port of
all for ships coming from the south.

Thus, then, favoured as it was by its natural situation and by its
character, the Thames became by far the most important highway in our
land, and this it remained for several centuries—until the coming of
the railways, in fact.

Now the River above London counts for very little in our system of
communications. Like all other English waterways, canals and rivers
alike, it has given place to the iron road, notwithstanding the fact
that goods can be carried by water at a mere fraction of the cost of
rail-transport. But our merchants do not seem to realize this; and so
in this matter we find ourselves a long way behind our neighbours on
the Continent.




LONDON RIVER




CHAPTER ONE

_London River_


From its mouth inwards to London Bridge the Thames is not the Thames,
for like many another important commercial stream it takes its name
from the Port to which the seamen make their way, and it becomes to
most of those who use it—London River.

Now where does London River begin at the seaward side? At the Nore. The
seaward limit of the Port of London Authority is somewhat to the east
of the Nore Light, and consists of an imaginary line stretching from
a point at the mouth of Havingore Creek (nearly four miles north-east
of Shoeburyness on the Essex coast) to Warden Point on the Kent coast,
eight miles or so from Sheerness; and this we may regard quite properly
as the beginning of the River. The opening here is about ten miles
wide, but narrows between Shoeburyness and Sheerness, where for more
practical purposes the River commences, to about six miles.

Right here at the mouth the River receives its last and most important
tributary—the Medway.

[Illustration]

For some miles up the estuary and the lower reaches the character
of the River is such that it is difficult to imagine anything less
interesting, less impressive, less suggestive of what the river
approach to the greatest city in the world should be; for there is
nothing but flat land on all sides, so flat that were not the great
sea-wall in position the whole countryside would soon revert to its
original condition of marsh and fenland. Were we unfamiliar with the
nature of the landscape, a glance at the map would convince us at once,
for in continuous stretch from Sheerness and the Medway we find on
the Kentish bank—Grain Marsh (the Isle of Grain), St. Mary’s Marshes,
Halslow Marshes, Cooling Marshes, Cliffe Marshes, and so on. Nor is
the Essex bank any better once we have left behind the slightly higher
ground on which stand Southend, Westcliff, and Leigh, for the low, flat
Canvey Island is succeeded by the Mucking and East Tilbury Marshes.

[Illustration: The Nore Lightship. _Where London River joins the Sea._]

The river-wall, extending right away from the mouth to London on the
Essex side, is a wonderful piece of engineering—man’s continuously
successful effort against the persistence of Nature—a feature strongly
reminiscent of the Lowlands on the other side of the narrow seas. Who
first made this mighty dyke? No one knows. Probably in many places it
is not younger than Roman times, and there are certain things about it
which tend to show an even earlier origin.

Indeed, so long ago was it made that the mouth and lower parts of the
River must have presented to the various invaders through the centuries
very much the same appearance as they present to anyone entering the
Thames to-day. The Danes in their long ships, prowling round the Essex
and Thanet coasts in search of a way into the fair land, probably saw
just these same dreary flats on each hand, save that when they sailed
unhindered up the River they caught in places the glint of waters
beyond the less carefully attended embankment. The foreign merchants
of the Middle Ages—the men of Genoa and Florence, of Flanders and the
Hanseatic Towns—making their way upstream with an easterly wind and a
flowing tide; the Elizabethan venturers coming back with their precious
cargoes from long and perilous voyages; the Dutch sweeping defiantly
into the estuary in the degenerate days of Charles II.—all these must
have beheld a spectacle almost identical with that which greets our
twentieth-century travellers returning from the East.

[Illustration: Sheerness on Sea]

Perhaps, at first sight, one of the most striking things in all this
stretch of the River is the absence of ancient fortifications. True,
we have those at Sheerness, but they were made for the guarding of
the dockyard and of the approach to the important military centre at
Chatham, which lies a few miles up the River Medway. Surely this great
opening into England, the gateway to London, this key to the entire
situation, should have had frowning castles on each shore to call a
halt to any venturesome, invading force. Thus we think at once with our
twentieth-century conception of warfare—forgetting that the cannon of
early days could never have served to throw a projectile more than a
mere fraction of the distance across the stream.

Not till we pass up the Lower Hope and Gravesend Reaches and come to
Tilbury and Gravesend, facing each other on the two banks, do we reach
anything like a gateway. Then we find Tilbury Fort on the Essex shore,
holding the way upstream. Here, at the ferry between the two towns, the
River narrows to less than a mile in width; consequently the artillery
of ancient days might have been used with something like effectiveness.

[Illustration: _Training Ships off Greenhithe._

“Arethusa” for Homeless Boys

“Worcester” Nautical Training College]

From Gravesend westwards the country still lies very low on each bank,
but the monotony is not quite so continuous, for here and there, first
at one side and then at the other, there rise from the widespread
flats little eminences, and on these small towns generally flourish.
At Northfleet and Greenhithe, for instance, where the chalk crops out,
and the River flows up against cliffs from 100 to 150 feet high, there
is by contrast quite a romantic air about the place, and the same may
be said of the little town of Purfleet, which lies four miles up the
straight stretch of Long Reach, its wooded chalk bluffs with their
white quarries very prominent in the vast plain. But, for the most
part, it is marshes, marshes all the way, particularly on the Essex
shore—marshes where are concocted those poisonously unpleasant mixtures
known as “London specials,” the thick fogs which do so much to make
the River, and the Port as well, a particularly unpleasant place at
certain times in winter. When a “London special” is about—that variety
which East Enders refer to as the “pea-soup” variety—the thick, yellow,
smoke-laden mist obscures everything, effectively putting an end to all
business for the time being.

Passing Erith on the Kent coast, and Dagenham and Barking on the
Essex, we come to the point where London really begins on its
eastward side. From now onwards on each bank there is one long,
winding line of commercial buildings, backed in each case by a vast
and densely-populated area. On the southern shore come Plumstead
and Woolwich, to be succeeded in continuity by Greenwich, Deptford,
Rotherhithe, and Bermondsey; while on the northern side come in
unbroken succession North Woolwich, Canning Town, and Silvertown
(backed by those tremendous new districts—East and West Ham, Blackwall
and Poplar, Millwall, Limehouse, Shadwell, and Wapping). In all the
eleven miles or so from Barking Creek to London Bridge there is
nothing to see but shipping and the things appertaining thereto—great
cargo-boats moving majestically up or down the stream, little tugs
fussing and snorting their way across the waters, wind-jammers of
all sorts and sizes dropping down lazily on the tide, small coastal
steamers, ugly colliers, dredgers, businesslike Customs motor-boats
and River Police launches, vast numbers of barges, some moving
beautifully under their own canvas, some being towed along in bunches,
others making their way painfully along, propelled slowly by their
long sweeps; there is nothing to hear but the noises of shipping—the
shrill cry of the syren, the harsh rattling of the donkey-engines, the
strident shouts of the seamen and the lightermen. Everything is marine,
for this is the Port of London.

[Illustration: London’s Giant Gateway]

Here where the River winds in and out are the Docks, those tremendous
basins which have done so much to alter the character of London River
during the last hundred years, that have shifted the Port of London
from the vicinity of London Bridge and the Upper Pool, and placed it
several miles downstream, that have rendered the bascules of that
magnificent structure, the Tower Bridge, comparatively useless things,
which now require to be raised only a very few times in the course of a
day.

In its course from the mouth inwards to the Port the River is steadily
narrowing. At Yantlet Creek the stream is about four-and-a-half miles
across; but in the next ten miles it narrows to a width of slightly
under 1,300 yards at Coalhouse Point at the upper end of the Lower Hope
Reach. At Gravesend the width is 800 yards, at Blackwall under 400,
while at London Bridge the width at high tide is a little less than 300
yards.

[Illustration: THE POOL.]

Just above and just below the Tower Bridge is what is known as the Pool
of London. Standing on the bridge, taking in the wonderful picture up
and down stream—the wide, filthy London River, with its craft of all
descriptions, its banks lined with dirty, dull-looking wharves and
warehouses, we find it hard to think of this as the River which we
shall see later slipping past Clevedon Woods and Bablock-hythe or under
Folly Bridge at Oxford. Up there all is bright and clean and sunny:
here even on the blithest summer day there is usually an overhanging
pall of smoke which serves to dim the brightest sunshine and add to
the dreariness of the scene.

Yet, despite its lack of beauty, despite all the drawbacks of its
ugliness and its squalor, this is one of the most romantic places in
all England: a place to linger in and let the imagination have free
rein. What visions these ships call up—visions of the wonderful East
with its blaze of colour and its burning sun, visions of Southern
seas with palm-clad coral islands, visions of the frozen North with
its bleak icefields and its snowy forest lands, visions of crowded
cities and visions of the vast, lonely places of the earth. For these
ordinary-looking ships have come from afar, bearing in their cavernous
holds the wealth of many lands, to be swallowed up by the ravenous maw
of the greatest port in the world.

[Illustration: Work and Wealth on a Thames-side Wharf.]

Every minute is precious here. Engines are rattling as the cranes lift
up boxes and bales from the interiors of the ships and deposit them in
the lighters that cluster round their sides. Inshore the cranes are
hoisting the goods from the vessels to the warehouses as fast as they
can. Men are shouting and gesticulating; syrens are wailing out their
doleful cry or screaming their warning note. Everything is hurry and
bustle, for there are other cargoes waiting to take the place of those
now being discharged, and other ships ready to take the berths of those
unloading; and there are tides to be thought of, unless precious hours
are to be wasted.

It is a fascinating place, is the Pool, and one which never loses its
interest for either young or old.




CHAPTER TWO

_The Estuary and its Towns_


Sheppey, on the coast of which is the Warden Point that forms one end
of the Port of London boundary line, is an island, separated from the
mainland of Kent by the Swale. People frequently speak of it as the
“Isle of Sheppey,” but this title is not strictly correct, for the name
Sheppey really includes the word “island.” William Camden, that old
writer on geographical subjects, informs us that “this Isle of Sheepe,
whereof it feedeth mightie great flocks, was called by our ancestours
Shepey—that is, the Isle of Sheepe.”

Though it is only eleven miles long and five miles broad, this little
island presents within its compass quite a variety of scenery,
especially when the general flatness of the whole area round about
is borne in mind; for, in addition to its riverside marshes, it has
a distinctly hilly ridge, geologically related to the North Downs,
surmounted by a little village rejoicing in the high-sounding name of
Minster-in-Sheppey, wherein at one time was the ancient Saxon “minster”
or “priory” of St. Saxburga. But the oft-repeated words concerning
“prophets” and “honour” apply to this little out-of-the-way corner, for
the men of Kent are wont to say that when the world was made Sheppey
was never finished.

Naturally, from its situation, right at the entrance to the Thames,
Sheppey always played some considerable part in the warfare of the
lower river. What happened in these parts in very early days we do
not know. We can only conjecture that Celts, coming across from the
mainland of Europe in their frail vessels, found this way into Britain,
and without hindrance sailed up the River to found the tiny settlement
of Llyndin hill: we can only surmise that later some of the Saxons
worked their way guardedly up the wide opening while the main body of
their comrades found other ways into this fair land. Not till the ninth
century do we begin to get any definite record of invasion. Then in
832 we find the Vikings, with their long-boats, hovering about the
mouth of the River, landing in Sheppey and raiding that little island
with its monastery on the hill. They returned in 839; and in 857 they
came with a great fleet of their long-boats—350 of them—in order that
they might advance up the River and make an attack on the city. In 893
they came yet again, landing either at Milton Creek on the Swale, or
at Milton nearly opposite Tilbury (it is uncertain which); but the men
of London drove them off. So it went on for many years, invasion after
invasion, till the days of Canute, when the River played a very great
part in the warfare, now favouring, now hampering the Danish leaders.

From the time of the Norman Conquest onwards there was, of course,
nothing in the way of foreign invasions; and the Thames, ceasing to be
a gateway by means of which the stranger might enter England, became
a barrier impeding the progress of the various factions opposing each
other in the national struggles—the War of the Barons, the Wars of the
Roses, and the great Civil War. In these, however, the Thames below
London played no very great part. Not till the days of Charles II.,
when the Dutch helped to write such a sorry chapter in our history, did
the Thames again loom large in our military annals.

Sheerness is, of course, the most famous place on the island, for it
has long been a considerable dockyard and port. The spot on which it
was built was reclaimed from the marshes in the time of the Stuarts,
and was chosen in the days of Charles II. as the situation for a new
dockyard. If we turn up the “Diary” of old Samuel Pepys, the Secretary
of the Admiralty of those days, we shall find under the date of August
18, 1665: “Walked up and down, laying out the ground to be taken in
for a yard to lay provisions for cleaning and repairing of ships, and
a most proper place it is for the purpose;” while on February 27, two
years later, His Majesty was at Sheerness to lay those fortifications
which were destined within less than six months to be destroyed by the
Dutch.

The other important town in Sheppey is Queenborough, a well-known
packet-station. Originally this was Kingborough, but it was
rechristened by Edward III. in honour of his Queen, Philippa, at the
time when William Wykeham (of whose skill as a builder we shall read in
the chapter on Windsor in Book III.) erected a castle on the spot where
the railway-station now stands. Eastchurch, towards the other end of
the island, developed a splendid flying-ground during the War.

On the other side of the Medway, forming a peninsula between that river
and the Thames, lies the Isle of Grain—a place which is not an island
and which has nothing whatever to do with grain. It consists of a
marshy promontory with a packet-station, Port Victoria, and a seaplane
base, Fort Grain, and very little else beside. At its western extremity
is the dirty little Yantlet Creek, close to which stands the well-known
“London Stone,” an obelisk set up to mark the point where, prior to the
Port of London Act, ended the power of the Lord Mayor of London in his
capacity as Conservator of the Thames.

Westwards from Yantlet Creek are great flats out of which rise the
batteries of Shornemead and Cliffe, considerable forts designed to
serve with that of Coalhouse Point, opposite on the Essex shore, as a
defence of the River. They were built in no very remote times, but were
practically never anything else than useless against modern artillery,
and were destined, so later military engineers said, to do more damage
to each other than to any invading foes.

On the Essex coast, opposite Sheerness, are two famous places, Southend
and Shoeburyness—the one a famous resort for trippers, the other an
important school of artillery.

Not so very long ago Southend was unheard of. Defoe, who covered the
ground hereabouts pretty thoroughly, makes no mention of it even
as a hamlet; yet to-day it is a flourishing and constantly growing
town—not so much a watering-place nowadays as a rather distant suburb
of London. For here and in the adjacent district of Westcliff, now by
the builders and the trams joined on, and even in Leigh still farther
west, live many of London’s more successful workers, making the
daily journey to and from town. Nor is this surprising, for Southend
is an enterprising borough—one that makes the most of its natural
advantages, and endeavours to cater equally well for the residents and
the casual visitors. Of course, the town will always be associated with
day-trippers from London, folk who come down with their families to get
a “whiff of the briny,” and a taste of the succulent cockles for which
Southend is noted, and to enjoy a ride in one of the numerous boats, or
on the tram that runs along the mile and a half length of Southend’s
vaunted possession, the longest pier in England. And while we laugh
sometimes at these trippers with their ribald enjoyment of strange
scenes, we must admit that they choose a most healthy and enjoyable
place.

At Shoeburyness, approached by way of the tramcars, things are far more
serious. Cockney joviality seldom gets so far from the pier as this.
Off the land here is a very extensive bank of shallows, and here the
artillerymen carry out their practice, the advantage being that in
such a spot the costly projectiles fired can be recovered and put in
order for future use.

Canvey Island, which lies tucked away in a little corner to the west
of Leigh, is yet another example of man’s triumph over nature, for it
has veritably been stolen from the waters. It was reclaimed as long
ago as 1622, by one Joas Cropperburgh, who for his labours received
about two thousand of its six thousand acres. And Dutch most assuredly
Canvey is—with quaint Dutch cottages, one of them a six-sided affair,
dated 1621, and set up by the very Dutchmen who came over to construct
the dams, and with Dutch dykes dividing the fields instead of hedges.
Robert Buchanan, in his novel “Andromeda,” wrote of it in these terms:
“Flat as a map, so intermingled with creeks and runlets that it is
difficult to say where water ends and land begins, Canvey Island lies,
a shapeless octopus, right under the high ground of Benfleet and
Hadleigh, and stretches out muddy and slimy feelers to touch and dabble
in the deep water of the flowing Thames. Away across the marshes rise
the ancient ruins of Hadleigh Castle, further eastwards the high spire
and square tower of Leigh Church.”

At the village of Benfleet, which he mentions, the Danes landed when in
874 they made one of their characteristic raids on the Thames Estuary;
and here they hoarded up the goods filched from the Essex villages till
such time as there should come a wind favourable for the journey home.

Like various other places on the Estuary and the lower reaches of
the River, Canvey Island has on occasions been proposed as a place
for deep-sea wharves, so that unloading might be carried out without
the journey up river, but so far nothing definite has come of these
suggestions.




CHAPTER THREE

_The Medway and its Towns_


From its position right at the entrance to the River the Medway
tributary has always offered a considerable contribution to the defence
of London. Going off as it does laterally from the main stream, the
Medway estuary has acted the part of a remarkably fine flank retreat.
Our forces, driven back at any time to the refuge of the River, could
always split up—part proceeding up the main stream towards London, and
part taking refuge in the protected network of waterways behind Sheppey
and the Isle of Grain. So that the indiscreet enemy, chasing the main
portion of the fleet up the estuary of the River, would always be in
danger of being caught between two fires. Which fact probably accounts
for the tremendous importance with which the Medway has always been
regarded in naval and military circles.

Passing between the Isle of Grain and Sheppey, and leaving on our
left hand the Swale, in which, so tradition says, St. Augustine
baptized King Ethelbert at Whitsun, 596, and on the other bank Port
Victoria, the packet-station, we find nothing very striking till we
catch sight of Upnor Castle, on the western bank of the river, facing
the Chatham Dockyard Extension. This queer old, grey-walled fortress
with its cylindrical towers, built in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
is not a very impressive place. It does not flaunt its strength from
any impregnable cliff, or even fling defiance from the top of a little
hill. Instead, it lies quite low on the river bank. Yet it has had
one spell of real life as a fortress, a few days of activity in that
inglorious time with which the tributary will ever be associated—the
days of “the Dutch in the Medway,” when de Ruyter and van Ghent came
with some sixty vessels to the Nore and in about two hours laid level
with the ground the magnificent and recently-erected fortifications of
Sheerness. This and the happenings of the next few weeks formed, as
old John Evelyn says in his “Diary,” “a dreadfull spectacle as ever
Englishman saw, and a dishonour never to be wiped off!”

In the pages of Charles Macfarlane’s story, “The Dutch in the Medway,”
is to be found a most interesting account of these calamitous
days, from which we cull the following extracts: “On the following
morning—the memorable morning of the 12th of June—a very fresh wind
from the north-east blew over Sheerness and the Dutch fleet, and a
strong spring-tide set the same way as the wind, raising and pouring
the waters upward from the broad estuary in a mighty current. And
now de Ruyter roused himself from his inactivity, and gave orders
to his second in command, Admiral van Ghent, to ascend the river
towards Chatham with fire-ships, and fighting ships of various rates.
Previously to the appearance of de Ruyter on our coasts, his Grace of
Albemarle had sunk a few vessels about Muscle Bank, at the narrowest
part of the river, had constructed a boom, and drawn a big iron chain
across the river from bank to bank, and within the boom and chain
he had stationed three king’s ships; and having done these notable
things, he had written to Court that all was safe on the Medway, and
that the Dutch would never be able to break through his formidable
defences. But now van Ghent gave his Grace the lie direct; for,
favoured by the heady current and strong wind, the prows of his ships
broke through the boom and iron chain as though they had been cobwebs,
and fell with an overwhelming force upon the ill-manned and ill-managed
ships which had been brought down the river to eke out this wretched
line of defence. The three ships, the _Unity_, the _Matthias_, and
the _Charles V._, which had been taken from the Dutch in the course
of the preceding year—the _Annus Mirabilis_ of Dryden’s flattering
poem—were presently recaptured and burned under the eyes of the Duke of
Albemarle, and of many thousands of Englishmen who were gathered near
the banks of the Medway.

“On the following morning (Thursday, the 13th of June) at about ten
o’clock, as the tide was rising, and the wind blowing right up the
river, van Ghent, who had been lying at anchor near the scene of his
yesterday’s easy triumph, unfurled his top-sails, called his men to
their guns, and began to steer through the shallows for Chatham.

“The mid-channel of the Medway is so deep, the bed so soft, and the
reaches of the river are so short, that it is the safest harbour in the
kingdom. Our great ships were riding as in a wet dock, and being moored
to chains fixed to the bottom of the river, they swung up and down with
the tide. But all these ships, as well as many others of lower rates,
were almost entirely deserted by their crews, or rather by those few
men who had been put in them early in the spring, rather as watchmen
than as sailors; some were unrigged, some had never been finished, and
scarcely one of them had either guns or ammunition on board, although
hurried orders had been sent down to equip some of them and to remove
others still higher up the river out of the reach of danger.

“It was about the hour of noon when van Ghent let go his anchor just
above Upnor Castle. But his fire-ships did not come to anchor. No!
Still favoured by wind and tide, they proceeded onward, and presently
fell among our great but defenceless ships. The two first of these
fire-ships burned without any effect, but the rest that went upward
grappled the _Great James_, the _Royal Oak_, and the _Loyal London_,
and these three proud ships which, under other names, and even under
the names they now bore, had so often been plumed with victory, lay a
helpless prey to the enemy, and were presently in a blaze.

“Having burned to the water’s edge the _London_, the _James_, and the
_Royal Oak_, and some few other vessels of less note, van Ghent thought
it best to take his departure. Yet, great as was the mischief he had
done, it was so easy to have done a vast deal more, that the English
officers at Chatham could scarcely believe their own eyes when they saw
him prepare to drop down the river with the next receding tide, and
without making any further effort ... the trumpeters on their quarter
decks playing ‘Loth to depart’ and other tunes very insulting and
offensive to English pride.”

What shall we say of Chatham, Rochester, and the associated districts
of Stroud and New Brompton? It is difficult, indeed, to find a great
deal that is praiseworthy. They may perhaps still be summed up in Mr.
Pickwick’s words: “The principal productions of these towns appear to
be soldiers, sailors, Jews, chalk, shrimps, officers, and dockyard men.”

Formerly the view from the heights of Chatham Hill must have been a
splendid one, with the broad Medway and its vast marshlands stretching
away for miles across to the wooded uplands of Hoo. Now it appears
almost as if a large chunk of the crowded London streets had been
lifted bodily and dropped down to blot out the beauties of the
scene, for there is little other to be seen than squalid buildings
huddled together in mean streets, with just here and there a great
chimney-stack to break the monotony of the countless roofs.

The dockyard at Chatham is much the same as any other dockyard, and
calls for no special description. From its slips have been launched
many brave battleships, right down from the days of Elizabeth to our
own times. Here at all seasons may be seen cruisers, battleships,
destroyers, naval craft of all sorts, dry docked for refitting. All day
long the air resounds to the noise of the automatic riveter, and the
various sounds peculiar to a shipbuilding area.

For many years the dockyard was associated with the name of Pett, a
name famous in naval matters, and it was on one member of the family,
Peter Pett, commissioner at Chatham, that most of the blame for the
unhappy De Ruyter catastrophe most unjustly fell. Somebody had to be
the scapegoat for all the higher failures, and poor Pett went to the
Tower. But not all people agreed with the choice, as we may see from
these satirical lines which were very popular at the time:

“All our miscarriages on _Pett_ must fall; His name alone seems fit
to answer all. Whose Counsel first did this mad War beget? Who would
not follow when the Dutch were bet? Who to supply with Powder did
forget Languard, Sheerness, Gravesend and Upnor? _Pett_. _Pett_, the
Sea Architect, in making Ships Was the first cause of all these Naval
slips; Had he not built, none of these faults had bin: If no Creation,
there had been no Sin.”

[Illustration: Rochester Castle.]

The river here is a very busy place, and is under certain circumstances
quite picturesque. There is a weird blending of ancient and modern,
of the dimly-comprehended past and the blatant, commercial present,
along Limehouse Reach, with its tremendous coal-hoists, and its smoking
stacks, and its brown-sailed barges and snorting tugs—with the great
masses of Rochester Castle and Cathedral looming out behind it all.

Limehouse Reach is, indeed, an appropriate name, for all along this
part, especially in the suburbs of Stroud and Frindsbury, the lime and
cement-making industries are carried on extensively. Throughout a great
deal of its length the Medway Valley is scarred by great quarries cut
into the chalk hills; for it is chalk and the river mud, mixed roughly
in the proportion of three to one and then burned in a kiln, which give
the very valuable Portland cement, an invention now about a century old.

[Illustration: Rochester Cathedral]

Rochester itself is a quaint old place, standing on the ancient Roman
road from Dover to London, and guarding the important crossing of the
Medway. It can show numbers of Roman remains in addition to its fine
old Norman castle, and its Cathedral with a tale of eight centuries.
The town stands to-day much as it stood when Dickens first described
it in his volumes. The Corn Exchange is still there—“oddly garnished
with a queer old clock that projects over the pavement out of a grave,
red-brick building, as if Time carried on business there, and hung out
his sign;” and so are Mr. Pickwick’s “Bull Hotel,” and the West Gate
(Jasper’s Gateway), and Eastbury House (Nuns’ House) of “Edwin Drood”;
also the famous house of the “Seven Poor Travellers.”




CHAPTER FOUR

_Gravesend and Tilbury_


The dreary fenland district which stretches from the Isle of Grain
inland to Gravesend is that so admirably used by Dickens for local
colour in his novel, “Great Expectations.” Some of his descriptions of
the scenery in this place of “mudbank, mist, swamps, and work” cannot
be bettered.

Here is Cooling Marsh with its quaint, fourteenth-century relic,
Cooling Castle Gatehouse, built at the time of the Peasants’ Revolt,
when the rich folk of the land found it expedient to do little or
nothing to aggravate the peasantry. The builder, Sir John de Cobham,
realizing the danger, saw fit to attach to one of the towers of his
stronghold a plate, to declare to all and sundry that there was in his
mind no thought other than that of protection from some anticipated
foreign incursions. This plate is still in position on the ruin, and
reads:

“Knowyth that beth and schul be That I am mad in help of the cuntre In
knowyng of whyche thyng Thys is chartre and wytnessynge.”

According to Dr. J. Holland Rose, the authority on Napoleonic subjects,
it was at a spot somewhere along this little stretch that Napoleon at
the beginning of the last century proposed to land one of his invading
columns. Other columns would land at various points on the Essex and
Kent coasts, and all would then converge on London, the main objective.
In fact, the Thames Estuary was such a vulnerable point that it
occupied a considerable position in the scheme of defence drawn up for
Pitt by the Frenchman Dumouriez.

Gravesend itself from the River is not by any means an ill-favoured
place, despite its rather commercial aspect. Backed by the sloping
chalk hills, and with a goodly number of trees breaking up the mass
of its buildings, it presents a tolerably picturesque appearance.
Particularly is it a welcome sight to those returning to England after
a long voyage, for it is frequently the first English town seen at all
closely.

[Illustration: Gravesend]

At Gravesend the ships, both those going up and those going down,
take aboard their pilots. The Royal Terrace Pier, which is the most
prominent thing on Gravesend river front, is the headquarters of the
two or three hundred navigators whose business it is to pilot ships
to and from the Port of London, or out to sea as far as Dungeness on
the south channel, or Orfordness, off Harwich, on the north channel.
These men work under the direction of a “ruler,” who is an official of
Trinity House, the corporation which was founded at Deptford in the
reign of Henry VIII., and which now regulates lighthouses, buoys, etc.

Gravesend is famous for two delicacies, its shrimps and its whitebait,
and the town possesses quite a considerable shrimp-fishing fleet.

As in the Medway Valley, the cement works form a conspicuous feature in
the district round about. In fact, all this stretch, where the chalk
hills crop out towards the River’s edge, has been famous through long
years for the quarrying of chalk and the making of lime, and afterwards
cement. As long ago as Defoe’s time we have that author writing: “Thus
the barren soil of Kent, for such the chalky grounds are esteemed,
make the Essex lands rich and fruitful, and the mixture of earth forms
a composition which out of two barren extremes makes one prolific
medium; the strong clay of Essex and Suffolk is made fruitful by the
soft meliorating melting chalk of Kent which fattens and enriches it.”

[Illustration: A River-side Cement Works]

On the Essex coast opposite Gravesend are the Tilbury Docks and the
Tilbury Fort—eloquent reminders of the present and the past. At the
Fort the ancient and the new lie in close proximity, the businesslike
but obsolete batteries of modern times keeping company with the quaint
old blockhouse, which at one time formed such an important point in the
scheme of Thames defence.

This old Tilbury Fort, with its seventeenth-century gateway, has been
so frequently painted that many folk who have never seen it are quite
familiar with its outline. At the beginning of the fifteenth century
the folk of Tilbury, realizing how vulnerable their settlement was, set
to work to fortify it, and later Henry VIII. built a blockhouse here,
probably on the site of an ancient Roman encampment. This, when the
Spanish Armada threatened, was altered and strengthened by Gianibelli,
the clever Italian engineer. Hither Elizabeth came, and, so tradition
says, made a soul-stirring speech to her soldiers:

[Illustration: THE GATEHOUSE, TILBURY FORT.]

“My loving people, we have been persuaded by some that are careful of
our safety, to take heed how we commit ourselves to armed multitudes
for fear of treachery. But I assure you, I do not desire to live to
distrust my faithful and loving people. Let tyrants fear. I have
always so behaved myself that, under God, I have placed my chiefest
strength and safeguard in the loyal hearts and goodwill of my subjects.
And therefore I am come among you at this time, not as for any
recreation or sport, but being resolved, in the midst of the heat and
the battle, to live or die amongst you all; to lay down for my God,
and for my kingdom, and for my people, my honour and my blood, even in
the dust. I know I have but the body of a weak and feeble woman; but
I have the heart of a king, and of a king of England, too; and think
foul scorn that Parma or Spain, or any prince of Europe, should dare
to invade the borders of my realm. To which, rather than any dishonour
should grow by me, I myself will take up arms; I myself will be your
general, judge, and rewarder of every one of your virtues in the field.”

She had need to feed them on words, for by reason of her own meanness
and procrastination the poor wretches had empty stomachs, or would
have had if the citizens of London had not loyally come to the
assistance of their soldiers. In any case Elizabeth’s exertion was
quite unnecessary, for the winds and the waves had conspired to do for
England what the Queen’s niggardliness might easily have prevented our
brave fellows from doing.

An earlier and no less interesting drama was enacted at Tilbury and
Gravesend in the reign of Richard II. Close in the train of that
national calamity, the Black Death, came in not unnatural consequence
the outbreak known as the Peasants’ Revolt. Just a short way east of
Tilbury, at a little village called Fobbing, broke out Jack Straw’s
rising; and almost simultaneously came the outburst of Wat Tyler, when
the Kentish insurgents marched on Canterbury, plundered the Palace,
and dragged John Ball from his prison; then moved rapidly across Kent,
wrecking and burning. At Tilbury and Gravesend these two insurgent
armies met, and thence issued their summons to the King to meet them.
He, brave lad of fifteen, entered his barge with sundry counsellors,
and made his way downstream. How he met the disreputable rabble, and
how the peasants were enraged because he was not permitted to land and
come among them, is a well-known story, as is the furious onslaught on
London which resulted from the refusal.

Thus far up the River came the Dutch in those terrible days of which
we read in our last chapter. They sailed upstream on the day of their
arrival, firing guns so that the sound was heard in the streets of
London, but they came to a halt slightly below the point where the
barricade, running down into the water from the Essex shore, largely
closed up the waterway, and where the little Fort frowned down on the
intruders. No attempt was made to stay them; indeed, none could have
been made, for while the little blockhouse was well provided with
guns, it was practically without powder; and the invaders could have
proceeded right into the Pool of London without hindrance had they but
known it. However, they were content for the time being with merely
frightening the countryside with their terrible noise. As Evelyn says
in his “Diary” (June 10): “The alarm was so great that it put both
country and city into a panic, fear and consternation, such as I hope I
shall never see more; everybody was flying, none knew why or whither.”
Having done this, the Dutch passed downstream to Sheerness, where their
companions were engaged in destroying the fortifications. How long
they stayed in these parts may be judged by this other extract from
Evelyn, dated seven weeks after (July 29): “I went to Gravesend, the
Dutch fleet still at anchor before the river, where I saw five of His
Majesty’s men-of-war encounter above twenty of the Dutch, in the bottom
of the Hope, chasing them with many broadsides given and returned
towards the buoy of the Nore, where the body of their fleet lay, which
lasted till about midnight.... Having seen this bold action, and their
braving us so far up the river, I went home the next day, not without
indignation at our negligence, and the Nation’s reproach.”

In 1904 it was proposed in the House of Commons that there should be
made at Gravesend a great barrage or dam, right across the River
Thames, with a view to keeping a good head of water in the stream above
Gravesend, much as the half-tide lock (about which we shall read in
Book III.) does at Richmond. This, the proposers said, would do away
with the cost of so much dredging, and would make the building of
riverside quays a much simpler and more satisfactory matter, for by
it the whole length of river between Gravesend and London would be to
all intents converted into one gigantic dock-basin. It was proposed
that the barrage should have in it four huge locks to cope with the
large amount of shipping, also a road across the top and a railway
tunnel underneath. But many weighty objections were urged, and numerous
difficulties were pointed out, so that the scheme fell through; and so
far the only semblance of a barrage known to Gravesend has been that
which was thrown right across the lower River for defensive purposes
during the Great War.




CHAPTER FIVE

_The Marshes_


The stretch between Gravesend and the beginnings of the Metropolis can
scarcely be regarded as an interesting portion of the River. True,
there are one or two places which stand out from the commonplace level,
but for the most part there is nothing much to attract; and certainly
from the point of view of the navigator of big ships there is much in
this stretch to repel, for here are to be found the numerous shoals
which tend to make the passage of the River so difficult.

Indeed, the problem of the constant filling of the bed of the River
has always been a difficult one with the authorities. The River brings
down a tremendous quantity of material (it is estimated that 1,000 tons
of carbonate of lime pass beneath Kingston Bridge each day), and the
tides bring in immense amounts of sand and gravel. Now, what becomes
of all this insoluble material? It passes on, carried by the stream
or the tidal waters, till it reaches the parts of the River where the
downflowing stream and the incoming sea-water are in conflict, and
so neutralize each other that there is no great flow of water. Then,
no longer impelled, the material sinks to the bottom and forms great
banks of sand, etc., which would in time grow to such an extent that
navigation would be impeded, were not dredgers constantly engaged in
the work of clearing the passage. It was largely this obstacle to
efficient navigation that led to the creation of the great deep-sea
docks at Tilbury.

Northfleet, formerly a small village straggling up the side of a
chalk hill, is now to all intents a suburb of Gravesend, so largely
has each grown in recent years. Here, officially at any rate, are
situated (about a mile to the west of Gravesend proper) those notorious
Rosherville Gardens which in the middle of last century made Gravesend
famous, and provided Londoners with a plausible reason for a trip down
the River. The gardens were laid out in 1830 to 1835 by one Jeremiah
Rosher, several disused chalk-pits being used for the purpose; and here
the jovial Cockney visitors regaled themselves within quaint little
arbours with tea and the famous Gravesend shrimps, and later danced to
the light of Chinese lanterns till it was time to return citywards from
the day’s high jinks.

The Dockyard at Northfleet, constructed towards the end of the
eighteenth century, was at one time a place of considerable importance,
for here were built and launched numbers of fine vessels, both on
behalf of the Royal Navy and of the East India Company. Now it has
dwindled to comparative insignificance. Indeed, from a shipping point
of view, the only interest lies in the numerous and familiar tan-sailed
barges of the Associated Portland Cement Manufacturers; for Northfleet
is one of the main centres of the cement industry so far as the
Thames-side is concerned—an industry which is in evidence right along
this stretch till the chalk hills end at Greenhithe, the town from
which Sir John Franklin set out in 1845 on his illfated expedition to
the North-West Passage.

At Grays (or Grays Thurrock, as it is more properly called), on the
Essex bank, are numbers of those curious subterranean chalk caves which
are a feature of most of the chalk uplands on both sides of the River,
and which have caused so much discussion among the archæologists. These
consist of vertical shafts, 3 or 4 feet in diameter, dug down through
anything from 50 to 100 feet of sand into the chalk below, where they
widen out into caves 20 or more feet long. As many as seventy-two of
them have been counted within a space of 4 acres in the Hangman’s Wood
at Grays. What they were for no one can tell. All sorts of things
have been conjectured, from the fabulous gold-mines of Cunobeline to
the smugglers’ refuges of comparatively modern times. One thing is
certain: they are of tremendous age. Probably they were used by their
makers mainly as secret storehouses for grain. They are commonly called
Dene-holes or Dane-holes, and are said to have served as hiding-places
in that hazardous period when the Danes made life in the valley
anything but pleasant. But this, while it may have been true, in no way
solves the mystery of their origin.

Purfleet, especially from a distance, is by no means unattractive, for
quite close to the station a wooded knoll, quaintly named Botany, rises
from the general flatness, and its greenery, contrasting strongly with
the white of the chalk-pits, lifts the town out of that dreariness,
merging into the positively ugly, which is the keynote of this part
of the River beside the Long and Fiddler’s Reaches. The Government
powder-magazine sets the fashion in beauty along a stretch which
includes lime-kilns, rubbish heaps of all sorts, and various small and
dingy works. Here at Purfleet (and also at Thames Haven, lower down
the River) have in recent years been set down great installations for
the storage of petrol and other liquid fuels—a riverside innovation of
great and increasing importance.

[Illustration: Bugsby’s Reach]

To the west of Purfleet lies a vast stretch of flats, known as Dagenham
Marshes, in many places considerably lower than the level of the River
at high tide, but protected from its advances by the great river-wall.
Apparently the wall at this spot must have been particularly weak,
for right through the Middle Ages and onwards we find it recorded
that great stretches of the meadows were laid under water owing to
the irruption of the tidal waters into the wall. There were serious
inundations in 1376, 1380, and 1381, when the landowners combined to
effect repairs. Again in 1594 and 1595 there was a serious failure of
the dyke, with the result that the whole adjacent flats were covered
twice a day. Now, this in itself would not have been so extremely
serious; but the constant passing in and out of the water caused a
deep hole to be washed out just inside the wall, and made the material
bank up and form a bar on the opposite side of the stream. For a
quarter of a century nothing was done, but eventually the Dutchman
Vermuyden was called in, and he repaired the wall successfully. But in
the days of Anne came an even more serious irruption, when the famous
Dagenham breach was formed. One night in the year 1707, owing to the
carelessness of the official in charge, the waters broke the dyke
once more, and swamped an area of a thousand acres or more, doing a
vast deal of mischief. Once again the danger to navigation occurred,
as the gravel, etc., swept out at each tide, formed a shoal half-way
across the River, and fully a mile in length. So dangerous, indeed,
was it that Parliament stepped in to find the £40,000 needed for the
repairs—a sum which the owners of the land could not have found. The
waters were partially drained off, and the bank repaired; but a very
big lake remained behind the wall, and remains to this day, as most
anglers are aware.

Towards the end of last century a scheme was set on foot for the
construction of an immense dock here, because, it was urged, the
excavations already done by the water would render the cost of
construction smaller. Parliament agreed to the proposal, and it
appeared as if this lonely part of Essex might become a great
commercial centre; but the construction of the Tilbury Docks
effectively put an end to the scheme. Now there is a Dagenham Dock, but
it is merely a fair-sized wharf, engaged for the most part in the coal
trade.

Barking stands on the River Roding, a tributary which comes down by
way of Ongar from the Hatfield Forest district near Epping, and which,
before it joins the main River, widens out to form Barking Creek, which
was, before the rise of Grimsby, the great fishing harbour.

Barking is a place of great antiquity, and of great historic interest,
though one would scarcely gather as much from a casual glance at
its very ordinary streets with their commonplace shops and rows of
drab houses—just as one would scarcely gather any idea of the charm
of the Roding at Ongar and above from a glimpse of the slimy Creek.
The town, in fact, goes even so far as to challenge the rival claims
of Westminster and the City to contain the site of the earliest
settlements of prehistoric man along the River valley. And certainly
the earthworks discovered on the north side of the town—fortifications
more than forty acres in extent and quite probably of Ancient British
origin—even if they do not justify the actual claim, at least support
the town in its contention that it is a place of great age.

Little or nothing is known, however, till we come to the time of the
foundation of its Abbey in the year 670. In that year, perhaps by
reason of its solitude out there in the marshes, the place appealed to
St. Erkenwald, the Bishop of London, as a good place for a monastic
institution, and the great Benedictine Abbey of the Blessed Virgin, the
first English convent for women, arose from the low-lying fenlands,
and started its life under the direction of the founder’s sister, St.
Ethelburgha.

It was destroyed by the Danes when they ventured up river in the year
870, but was rebuilt by King Edgar, after lying practically desolate
for a century. By the time of the Conquest it had become a place of
very great importance in the land, and to it came William after the
treaty with the citizens of London, and to it he returned when his
coronation was over, and there established his Court till such time as
the White Tower should be finished by the monk Gundulf and his builders.

Certainly it is a strange commentary on the irony of Time that this
present-day desolation of drab streets should once have been the centre
of fashion, to which came all the nobles in the south of England,
bringing their ladies fair, decked out in gay apparel to appear before
the King.

In 1376 the Abbey met with its first great misfortune. In that year
Nature conspired to the undoing of man’s great handiwork on the River,
and the tide made a great breach at Dagenham, thereby causing the
flooding of many acres of the Abbey lands, and driving the nuns from
their home to higher ground at Billericay. So much was the prosperity
of the Abbey affected by this disaster that the Convent of the Holy
Trinity, in London, granted the Abbess the sum of twenty pounds
annually (a large sum in those days) to help with the reclaiming of the
land.

Now of all the fine buildings of the Abbey practically nothing is left.
At the time of the Dissolution of the Monasteries it passed into the
King’s hands, and was afterwards sold to Lord Clinton. It has since
gone through many ownerships, but no one has seen fit to preserve it.
So that now practically all we can find is a sadly disfigured gateway
at the entrance to the churchyard. This was at one time referred to
as the “Chapel of the Holy Rood Loft atte Gate,” but the name was
afterwards changed to the more conveniently spoken “Fire-bell Gate.” Of
the actual Abbey buildings nothing remains.

The London church of All Hallows, Barking, standing at the eastern end
of Tower Street, quite close to Mark Lane Station, bears witness to
the privileges and great power of the nunnery in ancient days, for the
church was probably founded by the Abbey, and certainly the patronage
of the living was in the hands of the Abbess from the end of the
fourteenth century to the time of the suppression of the monasteries.

Just to the west of the Creek mouth is the outfall of the northern
drainage system of London. Vast quantities of sewage are brought daily,
by means of a gigantic concrete outfall sewer, which passes across
the flats from Old Ford and West Ham to Barking; and there they are
deposited in huge reservoirs covering ten acres of ground. The sewage
passes through four great compartments which together hold thirty-nine
million gallons; and, having been rendered more or less innocuous, is
discharged into the Thames at high tide. This arrangement was one of
the chief objections urged against the great barrage at Gravesend.




CHAPTER SIX

_Woolwich_


For many years there was a local saying to the effect that “more wealth
passes through Woolwich than through any other town in the world,” and,
though at first sight this may seem a gross exaggeration, yet when we
remember that Woolwich is in two parts, one on each side of the River,
we can see at once the justice of that claim, for it simply meant that
all the vast traffic to and from the Pool of London went along the
Thames as it flowed between the two divisions of the town.

To-day as we look at the drab, uninteresting place which occupies the
sloping ground extending up Shooter’s Hill and the riverside extent
from Charlton to Plumstead, we find it difficult to believe that this
was ever a place of such great charm that London folk found in it a
favourite summer-time resort. Yet we have only to turn up the “Diary”
of good old Pepys to read (May 28, 1667): “My wife away down with Jane
and Mr. Hewer to Woolwich, in order to a little ayre, and to lie there
to-night, and so to gather may-dew to-morrow morning, which Mrs. Yarner
hath taught her is the only thing in the world to wash her face with;
and I am contented with it.”

Of course, in those days Woolwich was in the country, surrounded by
fields and woods, in the latter of which lurked footpads ever ready to
relieve the unwary traveller of his purse. Thus we have Pepys writing
in 1662: “To Deptford and Woolwich Yard. At night, I walked by brave
moonlight with three or four armed men to guard me, to Rotherhithe,
it being a joy to my heart to think of the condition that I was now
in, that people should of themselves provide this for me, unspoke
to. I hear this walk is dangerous to walk by night, and much robbery
committed there”; and again in 1664: “By water to Woolwich, and walked
back from Woolwich to Greenwich all alone; saw a man that had a cudgel,
and though he told me he laboured in the King’s yard, yet, God forgive
me! I did doubt he might knock me on the head behind with his club.”

[Illustration: Woolwich]

Even a hundred years ago Woolwich was a comparatively small place,
consisting largely of the one main street, the High Street, with
smaller ways running down to the riverside. Shooter’s Hill was then
merely wild heathland, ill-reputed as the haunt of highwaymen.

Yet, for all that, Woolwich has been an important place through long
years, for here have existed for centuries various Government factories
and storehouses—at first the dockyards, and afterwards the Arsenal.

Just when the dockyards were founded it is difficult to say, but it is
generally agreed that it was either at the end of the reign of Henry
VII. or at the beginning of that of Henry VIII. Certain it is that from
the latter’s reign down to the early days of Victoria the dockyard
flourished. From its slips were launched many of the most famous of
the early old “wooden walls of England”—the _Great Harry_ (afterwards
called the _Henry Grace de Dieu_), the _Prince Royal_, the _Sovereign
Royal_, and also many of those made famous by the glorious victories
of Drake and Cavendish, and in the wonderful voyages of Hawkins and
Frobisher. The _Sovereign Royal_, which was launched in the time of
Charles I., was a fine ship of over 1,600 tons burden, and carried
no less than a hundred guns. “This royal ship,” says old Stow, “was
curiously carved, and gilt with gold, so that when she was in the
engagement against the Dutch they gave her the name of the ‘Golden
Devil,’ her guns, being whole cannon, making such havoc and slaughter
among them.”

With the passing away of the “wooden walls” and the advent of those
huge masses of steel and iron which have in modern times taken the
place of the picturesque old “three-deckers,” Woolwich began to decay
as a Royal dockyard; for it soon became an unprofitable thing to build
at Thames-side, and the shipbuilding industry migrated to towns nearer
to the coalfields and the iron-smelting districts.

Yet Woolwich continued, and has continued right down to this very day,
its activities as a gun-foundry and explosives factory. Just when
this part of the Royal works was founded we do not know. There is a
story extant (and for years the story was accepted as gospel) to the
effect that the making of the Arsenal was due entirely to a disastrous
explosion at Moorfields in the year 1716. Apparently much of the
Government work in those days was put out to contract, and a certain
factory in the Moorfields area took a considerable share in the work.
On one occasion a very large crowd had assembled to witness the casting
of some new and more up-to-date guns from the metal of those captured
by the Duke of Marlborough. Just as everything was ready, a clever
young Swiss engineer, named Schalch, noticed that the material in the
moulds was wet, and he warned the authorities of the danger. No notice
was taken, the molten metal was poured into the castings, and there was
a tremendous explosion. According to the story, the authorities were so
impressed by the part which Schalch had played in the matter that they
appointed him to take charge of a new Government foundry, and gave him
the choice of a site on which to build his new place, and he chose the
Woolwich Warren, slightly to the east of the Royal Dockyards. This is a
most interesting story, and one with an excellent moral, no doubt—such
a story, in fact, as would have delighted the heart of old Samuel
Smiles; but, unfortunately for its veracity, there have been discovered
at Woolwich various records which prove the existence of the Arsenal
before Schalch was born.

In normal times the Arsenal provides employment for more than eight
thousand hands, but, of course, in war-time this number is increased
tremendously. During the South African War, for instance, more than
twenty thousand were kept on at full time, and the numbers during the
Great War, when women were called in to assist and relieve the boys and
men, were even greater.

Of course, we cannot see everything at Woolwich Arsenal. There are
certain buildings in the immense area where strangers are never
permitted to go. In these various experiments are being carried out,
various new inventions tested, and for this work secrecy is essential.
It would never do for a rival foreign Power to get even small details
of a new gun, or explosive, or other warlike device. But still there
is much that can be seen (after permission to visit has been obtained
from the War Office)—remarkable machines which turn out with amazing
rapidity the various parts of cartridges and shells; giant rolling
machines and steam-hammers that fashion the huge blocks of steel, and
tremendous machines that convert them into huge guns; machines by which
gun-carriages and ammunition-waggons are turned out by the dozen.

Half a century ago there was a great stir at Woolwich when the Arsenal
turned out for the arming of the good ship _Hercules_ a new gun known
as the “Woolwich Infant.” This weapon, which required a fifty-pound
charge of powder, could throw a projectile weighing over two
hundredweights just about six miles, and could cause a shell to pierce
armour more than a foot thick at a distance of a mile. Naturally, folk
in those days thought them terrible weapons. But the “infants” were
soon superseded, for a few years later Woolwich turned out what were
known as “eighty-one-ton guns”—deadly weapons which could fire a shell
weighing twelve hundred pounds. Folk lifted their hands in surprise
at the attainments of those days; but it is difficult to imagine their
amazement if they could have seen our present-day guns firing shells
thirty miles, or the great “Big Bertha,” by means of which the Germans
fired shots from a distance of seventy miles into Paris.

The tremendous guns of to-day are built up, not cast in moulds all in
one piece, as were those in the early years of the Woolwich foundry.
There is an inner tube and an outer, the latter of which is shrunk
on to the former. The larger tube is heated, and of course the metal
expands. While it is in that condition the other is placed inside, and
the whole thing is lowered by tremendous cranes into a big bath of oil.
The metal contracts again as it cools, and in that way the outer tube
is fixed so tightly against the inner that they become practically one
single tube, but with greatly added strength. The tube is then carried
to a giant lathe, where it receives the rifling on its inner surface.

When we turn away from Woolwich it is perhaps with something like a
sigh to think that men will spend all this money, and devote all this
time and labour and material, merely in order that they may be able to
blow each other to pieces.




CHAPTER SEVEN

_Greenwich_


The history of towns no less than the history of men can tell strange
tales of failure and success. Some have had their era of intoxicating
splendour, have been beloved of kings and commoners alike, have counted
for much in the great struggles with which our tale is punctuated, and
then, their little day over, have shrunk to the merest vestige of their
former glory. Others, unknown and insignificant villages throughout
most of the story, have sprung up, mushroom-like, almost in a night,
and entered suddenly and confidently into the affairs of the nation.

In the former class must, perhaps, be counted Greenwich. True, it has
not had the disastrous fall, the unspeakable humiliation, of some
English towns—Rye and Winchelsea on the south coast, for instance—yet
over Greenwich now might well be written that word “Ichabod”—“The
glory is departed.” For Greenwich to-day, apart from its two
places of outstanding interest, the Hospital and the Park with its
Observatory, is largely an affair of mean streets, a collection of
tiny, uninteresting shops and drab houses. Yet Greenwich was for long
a place of great fame, to which came kings and courtiers, for here was
that ancient and glorious Palace of Placentia, a strong favourite with
numbers of our monarchs.

[Illustration: GREENWICH PARK.]

Really it began its life as a Royal demesne in the year 1443, when the
manor was granted to Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, and permission
given for the fortification of the building and enclosing of a park of
two hundred acres. The Duke interpreted his permission liberally, and
erected a new palace, to which he gave the name of Placentia, the House
of Pleasance. He formed the park, and at the summit of the little hill,
one hundred and fifty feet or more above the River, constructed a tower
on the identical spot where the Observatory now stands. On Humphrey’s
death the Crown once more took charge of the property. Edward IV. spent
great sums in beautifying it, so that it was held in the highest esteem
by the monarchs that followed. Henry VII. provided it with a splendid
brickwork river front to increase its comeliness.

Here, in 1491, was born Henry VIII., and here he married Katherine of
Aragon. Here, too, his daughters, Mary (1515) and Elizabeth (1533),
first saw the light. Edward VI., his pious young son, breathed his last
within the walls.

In those days the River banks did not present quite the same commercial
aspect as in our own times; the atmosphere was not quite so befouled
by the smoke of innumerable chimneys, the water was not quite so muddy;
and in consequence the journey by water from the City to that country
place, Greenwich, was a little more pleasant. Indeed, it is said that
the view up river from Greenwich Park rivalled that from Richmond Hill
in beauty. In those days all who could went by water, for the River was
the great highway. Then was its surface gay with brightly painted and
decorated barges, threading their way downstream among the picturesque
vessels of that time.

From Placentia the sovereign could watch the ever-changing but
never-ending pageant of the River, see the many great ships bringing
in the wealth from all known lands, and watch the few journeying forth
in search of lands as yet unknown. Thus on one occasion the occupants
viewed the departure of three shiploads of brave mariners setting forth
to search for a new passage to India by way of the Arctic regions—a
scene which old Hakluyt describes for us: “The greater shippes are
towed downe with boates and oares, and the mariners being all
apparelled in watchet or skie-coloured cloth rowed amaine and made
with diligence. And being come neare to Greenwiche (where the Court
then lay) presently upon the newes thereof the courtiers came running
out and the common people flockt together, standing very thicke upon
the shoare; the privie counsel they lookt out at the windowes of the
court and the rest ran up to the toppes of the towers; and shoot off
their pieces after the manner of warre and of the sea, insomuch that
the toppes of the hilles sounded therewith, the valleys and the waters
gave an echo and the mariners they shouted in such sort that the skie
rang againe with the noyse thereof. Then it is up with their sails, and
good-bye to the Thames.”

Nor in talking of Greenwich must we forget the famous Ministerial fish
dinners which were for so many years a great event in the life of the
town. This custom arose, it is said, from the coming of the Government
Commissioners to examine Dagenham Breach, when they so enjoyed the
succulent fare set before them that they insisted on an annual
repetition, which function was afterwards transferred to the “Ship” at
Greenwich.

At the toe of the great horseshoe bend which gives us Millwall and the
Isle of Dogs stands that famous group of buildings known as Greenwich
Hospital, but more correctly styled the Greenwich Naval College.

This is built on the site of the old Palace. When, following the
Revolution, Charles II. came to the throne, he found the old place
almost past repair, so he decided to pull it down and erect a more
sumptuous one in its place. Plans were accordingly drawn up by the
architect, Inigo Jones, and the building commenced; but only a very
small portion—the eastern half of the north-western quarter—was
completed during his reign.

It was left to William and Mary, those eager builders, to carry on the
work, which they did with the assistance of Sir Christopher Wren, to
whose powers of architectural design London owes so much. Very little
was done during the life of Queen Mary, but as the idea was hers,
William went on with the work quite gladly, as a sort of memorial to
his wife.

Of course, a very large sum of money was needed for the erection of
such a place. The King himself provided very liberally—a good deed in
which he was followed by courtiers and private citizens. But quite
a large amount was found in several very interesting ways. Since
the buildings were designed to provide a kind of hospital or asylum
for aged and disabled seamen who were no longer able to provide for
themselves, it was decided to utilize naval funds to some extent. So
money was obtained from unclaimed shares in naval prize-money, from the
fines which captured smugglers had to pay, and from a levy of sixpence
a month which was deducted from the wages of all seamen. Building went
on apace, and (to quote Lord Macaulay) “soon an edifice, surpassing
that asylum which the magnificent Lewis had provided for his soldiers,
rose on the margin of the Thames. Whoever reads the inscription which
runs round the frieze of the hall will observe that William claims
no part in the merit of the design, and that the praise is ascribed
to Mary alone. Had the King’s life been prolonged till the work was
completed, a statue of her who was the real founder of the institution
would have had a conspicuous place in that court which presents two
lofty domes and two graceful colonnades to the multitudes who are
perpetually passing up and down the imperial River. But that part of
the plan was never carried into effect; and few of those who now gaze
on the noblest of European hospitals are aware that it is a memorial of
the virtues of the good Queen Mary, and the great victory of La Hogue.”

[Illustration: GREENWICH HOSPITAL.]

In 1705 the preparations were complete, and the first pensioners were
installed in their new home. The place was very successful at the
start, and it grew till at the beginning of the nineteenth century
there were nearly three thousand men residing within the Hospital
walls, and many more boarded out in the town.

Then through half a century the prosperity of the place began to
decline. The old pensioners died off, and the new ones, as they came
along, for the most part preferred to accept out-pensions and live
where they liked. So that in 1869 it was decided to abandon the place
as an asylum for seamen and convert it into a Royal Naval College, in
which to give training to the officers of the various branches of the
naval services, and also a Naval Museum and a Sailors’ Hospital.

Perhaps one of the most interesting places in the College is the
Painted Hall, a part of Wren’s edifice, known as King William’s
Quarter. The ceilings of this double-decked dining-hall—the upper part
for officers and the lower for seamen—and the walls of the upper part
are decorated most beautifully with paintings which it took Sir James
Thornhill nineteen years to complete. Around the walls hang pictures
which tell of England’s naval glory—pictures of all sizes depicting our
most famous sea-fights and portraying the gallant sailors who won them.
Naturally Lord Nelson is much in evidence here, and we can see in cases
in the upper hall the very clothes he wore when he received that fatal
wound in the cockpit of the _Victory_—the scene of which is depicted
on a large canvas on the walls; also in cases his pigtail, his sword,
medals, and various other relics.

The Museum is a fascinating place, for it contains what is practically
a history of our Navy set out, not in words in a dry book, but in
models of ships; and we can study the progress right from the Vikings’
long-boats, with their rows of oars and their shields hanging all
round the sides, down to the massive super-dreadnoughts of to-day.
Most interesting of all, perhaps, are the great sailing ships—the old
“wooden walls of England”—which did so much to establish and maintain
our position as a maritime nation—the great three-deckers which stood
so high out of the water, and which with their tall masts and gigantic
sails looked so formidable and yet so graceful. There in a case is
the _Great Harry_—named after Henry VIII.—a double-decker of fifteen
hundred tons burden, with three masts, and carrying seventy-two guns.
She was a fine vessel, launched at Woolwich Dockyard in 1515, and was
the first vessel to fire her guns from portholes instead of from the
deck. In another case is the first steam vessel ever used in the Navy
(1830), and a quaint little craft it is.

This is indeed a splendid collection, and we feel as if we could spend
hours studying these fascinating little models.

[Illustration: THE ROYAL OBSERVATORY.]

On the site of Duke Humphrey’s tower in Greenwich Park is the
world-famous Observatory. If you take up your atlas, and look at the
map of the British Isles or the map of Europe, you will see that the
meridian of longitude (or the line running north and south) marked 0°
passes through the spot where Greenwich is shown. This means that all
places in Europe to the right or the left—east or west, that is—are
located and marked by their distance from Greenwich; and, if for no
other reason, this town is because of this fact a very important place
in the world.

The Observatory was founded in the reign of Charles II. This monarch
had occasion to consult Flamsteed, the astronomer, concerning the
simplifying of navigation, and Flamsteed pointed out to him the need
for a correct mapping-out of the heavens. As a result the Observatory
was built in 1695 in order that Flamsteed might proceed with the work
he had suggested.

The Duke’s tower was pulled down, and the new place erected; but it
was left to Flamsteed to find his own instruments and pay his own
assistants, all out of a salary of one hundred pounds per annum.
Consequently, he became so poor that when he died in 1719 his
instruments were seized to pay his debts. His successor, Dr. Halley,
another famous astronomer, refitted the Observatory, and some of his
instruments can be seen there now, though no longer in use, of course.

Few people are allowed inside the Observatory to see all the wonderful
telescopes and other instruments there; but there are several things to
be seen from the outside, notably the time-ball which is placed on the
north-east turret, and which descends every day exactly at one o’clock;
also the electric clock with its twenty-four-hours dial.




CHAPTER EIGHT

_The Port and the Docks_


Any person standing on London Bridge a couple of centuries ago would
have observed a scene vastly different from that of to-day. Now we see
the blackened line of wharves and warehouses on the two banks, and up
against them steamers discharging or receiving their cargoes, while out
in the stream a few vessels of medium size and one or two clusters of
barges lie off, awaiting their turn inshore; otherwise the wide expanse
of the stream is bare, save for the occasional craft passing up and
down in the centre of the stream. But in days gone by, as we can tell
by glancing at the pictures of the period, the River was simply crowded
with ships of all kinds, anchored closely together in the Pool, while
barges innumerable plied between them and the shore.

In very early days only Billingsgate and Queenhithe possessed
accommodation for ships to discharge and receive their cargoes
actually alongside the quay; for the most part ships berthed out in the
stream, and effected the exchange of goods by means of barges.

Then, as trade increased by leaps and bounds, a number of “legal quays”
were instituted between London Bridge and the Tower, and thither came
the major part of the merchandise. Gradually little docks or open
harbours were cut into the land in order to relieve the congestion of
the quays. Billingsgate was the first of these, and for many years the
most important. Now the dock has for the most part been filled in, and
over it has been erected the famous fish-market, which still carries
on one of the main trades of the little ancient dock. Others were St.
Katherine’s Dock, a tiny basin formed for the landing of the goods of
the monastery which stood hard by the Tower; St. Saviour’s Dock in
Bermondsey on the Surrey side; and Execution Dock close to Wapping Old
Stairs.

However, with the tremendous growth of trade following the Great Fire
of London, concerning which we shall read in Book II., and with the
growth in the size of vessels and the consequent increase in the
difficulties of navigation, the facilities for loading and unloading
proved totally inadequate, and the merchants were led to protest, on
the grounds that the overcrowding led to great confusion and many
abuses, and for a great number of years they entreated Parliament to
take some action.

[Illustration:

DOCKLAND.]

The coming of the great docks ended the trouble, and also tremendously
changed the Port of London. When the West India Docks were opened
in 1802, ships concerned with the transport of certain articles of
commerce were no longer allowed to lie in the Pool for the purpose of
discharge: they were compelled to go to the particular dock-quays set
aside for their use, and to land there the merchandise they carried.
Thus practically at a stroke of the pen the riverside wharves lost
their entire traffic in such things as sugar, rum, brandy, spices,
and other goods from the West Indies. Similarly, when the East India
Docks were opened all the commerce of the East India Company was
landed there. Thus, gradually, as the various larger docks were made
from time to time, the main business of the Port shifted eastwards to
Millwall, Blackwall, etc. Nor did it stop there. With the coming of
ships larger even than those already catered for, it became necessary
to do something to avoid the passage of the shallow, winding reaches
above Gravesend, and, in consequence, tremendous docks were opened at
Tilbury. So that now vessels of the very deepest draught enter and
leave the docks independent of the tidal conditions, and do not come
within many miles of London Bridge.

This does not mean that the riverside wharves and warehouses were
rendered useless by the shifting of the Port. So great had been the
congestion that even with the relief of the new docks there was
still—and there always has been—plenty for them to do. To-day there
are miles of private wharves in use: from Blackfriars down to Shadwell
the River is lined with them on both sides all the way; and they share
with the great docks and dock warehouses the vast trade of the Port of
London.

Let us take a short trip down through dockland, and see what this
romantic place has to show us. We must go by water. That is essential
if we are to see anything at all, for so shut in is the River by tall
warehouses, etc., that we might wander for hours and hours in the
streets quite close to the shore, and yet never catch a glimpse of the
water.

Leaving Tower Bridge, we find immediately on our left the St.
Katherine’s Docks. These get their name from the venerable foundation
which formerly stood on the spot. This religious house was created and
endowed by Maud of Boulogne, Queen of Stephen, and lasted through
seven centuries down to about a hundred years ago. It survived even
the Dissolution of the Monasteries, which swept away all other London
foundations, being regarded as more or less under the protection of
the Queen. Yet this wonderful old foundation, with its ancient church,
its picturesque cloisters and schools, its quaint churchyard and
gardens—one of the finest mediæval relics which London possessed—was
completely destroyed to make way for a dock which could have been
constructed just as well at another spot. London knows no worse
example of needless, stupid, brutal vandalism! St. Katherine’s Dock
is concerned largely with the import of valuable articles: to it come
such things as China tea, bark, india-rubber, gutta-percha, marble,
feathers, etc.

London generally is the English port for _tea_: hither is brought
practically the whole of the country’s consumption. During the War
efforts were made to spread the trade more evenly over the different
large ports; but the experiment was far from a success. All the vast
and intricate organization for blending, marketing, distributing,
etc., is concentrated quite close to St. Katherine’s Dock, and in
consequence the trade cannot be managed so effectively elsewhere. The
value of the tea entering the Port of London during 1913, the year
before the War, and therefore the last reliable year for statistics,
was nearly £13,500,000.

[Illustration: Low water, Dockhead Bermondsey]

A little below St. Katherine’s, on the Surrey shore, is one of the
curiosities of dockland—a dock which nobody wants. This is St.
Saviour’s Dock, Bermondsey—a little basin for the reception of smaller
vessels. It is disowned by all—by the Port of London Authority, by
the Borough Council, and by the individual firms who have wharves and
warehouses in the vicinity. You see, there is at one part of the dock a
_free_ landing-place, to which goods may be brought without payment of
any landing-dues; and no one wants to own a dock without full rights.
Shackleton’s _Quest_ berthed here while fitting out for its long voyage
south.

From St. Katherine’s onward for several miles the district on the north
bank is known as Wapping. This was for many years the most marine of
all London’s riverside districts. Adjoining the Pool, it became, and
remained through several centuries, the sojourning-place of “those
who go down to the sea in ships.” Here, at famous Wapping Old Stairs
or one of the other landing-steps which ran down to the water’s edge
at the various quay-ends, Jack said good-bye to his sweetheart as
he jumped into one of the numerous watermen’s boats, and was rowed to
his ship lying out in the stream; here, too, there waited for Jack,
as he came home with plenty of money, all those crimps and vampires
whose purpose it was to make him drunk and rob him of all his worldly
goods. Harbouring, as it did, numbers of criminals of the worst type,
Wapping for many years had a very bad name. Now all that has changed.
The shifting of the Port deprived the sharks of their victims, for
the seamen no longer congregated in this one area: they came ashore
at various points down the River. Moreover, the making of the St.
Katherine and later the London Docks cut out two big slices from the
territory, with a consequent destruction of mean streets.

[Illustration:

LIMEHOUSE HOLE.]

[Illustration:

ENTRANCE TO WAPPING OLD STAIRS.]

Close to Wapping Old Stairs was the famous Execution Dock. This was
the spot where pirates, smugglers, and sailors convicted of capital
crimes at sea, were hanged, and left on the foreshore for three tides
as a warning to all other watermen. Now, with the improvements at Old
Gravel Lane, all traces have vanished, and the wrong-doers no longer
make that last wretched journey from Newgate to Wapping, no longer stop
half-way to consume that bowl of pottage for which provision was made
in the will of one of London’s aldermen.

The goods which enter London Dock are of great variety—articles of food
forming a considerable proportion.

Limehouse follows on the northern shore, and is perhaps, even more than
Wapping, the marine district of these days. Here, in a place known as
the Causeway, is the celebrated Chinese quarter. Regent’s Canal Dock,
which includes the well-known Limehouse Basin, a considerable expanse
of water, is the place where the Regent’s Canal begins its course
away to the midlands. The chief goods handled at Limehouse Basin were
formerly timber and coal, but since the War this has become the centre
for the German trade. Here are frequently to be seen most interesting
specimens of the northern “wind-jammers.”

Leaving Limehouse, the River sweeps away southwards towards Greenwich,
and then turns sharply north again to Blackwall. By so doing it forms
a large loop in which lies the peninsula known as the Isle of Dogs—a
place which has been reclaimed from its original marshy condition, and
covered from end to end with docks, factories, and warehouses, save at
the southernmost extremity, where the London County Council have made a
fine riverside garden. In the Isle are to be found the great West India
Docks and the Millwall Docks. The former receive most of the furniture
woods—mahogany, walnut, teak, satin-wood, etc.—and also rum, sugar,
grain, and frozen meat; while the latter receive largely timber and
grain.

On the Surrey side of the River, practically opposite the West India
and Millwall Docks, are the Surrey Commercial Docks, occupying the
greater portion of a large tongue of land in Rotherhithe. To these
docks come immense quantities of timber, grain, cattle, and hides—the
latter to be utilized in the great tanning factories for which
Bermondsey is famous.

Blackwall, the last riverside district within the London boundary, is
famous for its tunnel, which passes beneath the bed of the River to
Greenwich. This is but one of a number of tunnels which have been made
beneath the stream in recent years. There is another for vehicles and
passengers passing across from Rotherhithe to Limehouse, while further
upstream are those utilized by the various tube-railways in their
passage from north to south.

Blackwall has a number of docks, large and small. Among the latter are
several little dry-docks which exist for the overhauling and repairing
of vessels. There was a time when shipbuilding and ship-repairing were
considerable industries on the Thames-side, when even battleships were
built there, and thousands of hands employed at the work; but the trade
has migrated to other dockyard towns, and all that survive now are the
one or two repairing docks at Blackwall and Millwall.

The Royal Albert and the Victoria Docks come within the confines of
those great new districts, West Ham and East Ham, which have during the
last thirty or forty years sprung up, mushroom-like, from the dreary
flats of East London. Here are such well-known commercial districts as
Silvertown and Canning Town. The former will doubtless be remembered
through many years for the tremendous explosion which occurred there
during the War—an explosion which resulted in serious loss of life and
very great damage to property. It is also famous for several great
factories, notably Messrs. Knight’s soap-works, Messrs. Henley’s cable
and general electrical works, and Messrs. Lyle’s (and Tate’s) sugar
refineries. These places, which employ thousands of hands, are of
national importance.

Canning Town has to some extent lost its prestige, for it was in
time past the shipbuilding area. Here were situated the great Thames
Ironworks, carrying on a more or less futile endeavour to compete with
the Clyde and other shipbuilding districts.

This district is, to a large extent, the coal-importing area. Coal is
the largest individual import of the Port of London, as much as eight
million tons entering in the course of a year. The chief articles of
commerce with which the Royal Albert and Victoria Docks are concerned
are: Tobacco, frozen meat, and Japanese productions.

Vast, indeed, have been the revenues drawn from the various docks. You
see, goods are not entered or dispatched except on payment of various
dues and tolls, and these amount up tremendously. So that the Dock
Companies get so much money from the thirty miles of dockside quays and
riverside wharves that they scarcely know what to do with it, for the
amount they can pay away in dividends to their shareholders is strictly
limited by Act of Parliament. In one year, for instance, so large a
profit was made by the owners of the East and West India Docks that
they used up an enormous sum of money in roofing their warehouses with
sheet copper.

       *       *       *       *       *

In concluding our rapid tour through dockland, it is impossible to
omit a reference to the Customs Officers—those cheery young men who
work in such an atmosphere of unsuspected romance. To spend a morning
on the River with one of them, as he goes his round of inspection of
the various vessels berthed out in the stream, is a revelation. To
visit first this ship and then the other; to see the amazing variety
of the cargoes, the number of different nationalities represented,
both in ships and men; to come into close touch with that strange and
little-understood section of the community, the lightermen, whose work
is the loading of the barges that cluster so thickly round the great
hulls—is to move in a world of dreams. But to go back to the Customs
Offices and see the huge piles of documents relating to each single
ship that enters the port, and to be informed that on an average two
hundred ocean-going ships enter each week, is to experience a rude
awakening from dreams, and a sharp return to the very real matters of
commercial life.

[Illustration:

Home From the Indies. A Giant Liner warping into the George V^{th}.
Dock.]

Nor must we forget the River Police, who patrol the River from Dartford
Creek up as far as Teddington. As we see them in their launches,
passing up and down the stream, we may regard their work as easy; but
it is anything but that—especially at night-time. Then it is that the
river-thieves get to work at their nefarious task of plundering the
valuable cargoes of improperly attended lighters. The River Police must
be ever on the alert, moving about constantly and silently, lurking
in the shadows ready to dash out on the unscrupulous and dangerous
marauders. The headquarters of the River Police are at Wapping, but
there are other stations at Erith, Blackwall, Waterloo, and Barnes.

In 1903 the question of establishing one supreme authority to deal with
all the difficulties of dockland and take control of practically the
whole of the Port of London was discussed in Parliament, and a Bill
was introduced, but owing to great opposition was not proceeded with.
However, the question recurred from time to time, and in 1908 the Port
of London Act was at length passed.

This established the Port of London Authority, for the purpose of
administering, preserving, and improving the Port of London. The limits
of the Authority’s power extend from

Teddington down both sides of the River to a line just east of the Nore
lightship. At its inception the Authority took over all the duties,
rights, and privileges of the Thames Conservancy in the whole of this
area.




BOOK II


[Illustration:

_Reproduced from photographs by permission of Airco Aerials, Ltd._]

[Illustration: THE GREAT CITY WHICH THE RIVER MADE

_Reproduced from photographs by permission of Airco Aerials, Ltd._]


[Illustration: THE LONDON COUNTY HALL.]




THE GREAT CITY WHICH THE RIVER MADE




CHAPTER ONE

_How the River founded the City_


England at the time when London first came into being was a very
different place from the well-cultivated country which we know so
well. Where now stretch hundreds of square miles of orderly green
meadows and ploughed fields, divided from each other by trim hedges,
or pretty little copses, or well-kept roads, there was then a vast
dense forest, wherein roamed wolves and other wild animals, and into
which man scarcely dared to penetrate. This stretched from sea to sea,
covering hill and valley alike. Just here and there could be found the
tiny settlements of the native Britons, and in some few cases these
settlements were joined by rough woodland tracks.

The only real breaks in this widespread covering of green occurred
where the rivers flowed seawards along the valleys. These rivers for
the most part ran their courses in practically the same directions
as at present, but in appearance they were very different from the
rivers we know to-day. No man-made embankments kept them in place in
those days; instead they wandered through great stretches of marsh
and fenland, and spread out into wide, shallow pools here and there
in their courses, so that to cross them was a matter of the greatest
difficulty.

Such was the Thames when the first “Londoners” formed their tiny
settlement. From the mouth of the River inland for many miles stretched
widespread, impassable marshes; but at one spot—where now stands St.
Paul’s Cathedral—there was a firm gravel bank and a little hill (or
rather two little hills with a stream between), which stood out from
the encompassing wastes. In front of this small eminence stretched a
great lagoon formed by the over-flowing of the River at high tide. This
covered the ground on which have since been built

Southwark and Lambeth, and stretched southwards as far as the heights
of Sydenham. West of the little hill, running down a deep ravine,
where now is the street called Farringdon Street, was a tributary
river, afterwards known as the Fleet; and beyond that yet another great
marshland stretched away over Westminster, Belgravia, Chelsea, and
Fulham. To the north was the pathless forest.

This then appealed to the intelligence of a few Ancient Britons as an
ideal spot for a settlement, and so sprang into existence _Llyndin_,
the lake-fortress.

But that, of course, did not make LONDON, did not raise London to the
position of pre-eminence which it gradually attained, and which it has
held almost without contest through so many centuries.

Between the time of the formation of this little collection of huts
with its slight protecting stockade and the coming of the Romans much
happened. The Ancient Britons learned to make roads—primitive ones, of
course—and in all probability they learned to make embankments to the
River. Their greatest trade naturally was with Gaul—France, that is—and
also, equally naturally, practically all such trade had to come through
the one most suitable way, the spot which has always, through all the
ages, been the gateway into England—Dover. In the days when sea-going
craft had not reached a high stage of perfection it was necessary to
choose the shortest passage across the channel, and, though no doubt
other ports were used, undoubtedly the bulk of the merchandise came
across the narrow Straits. This meant, without a doubt, an important
road going north-westwards towards the centre of England.

Now right across the country, from west to east, stretched the great
natural barrier, the River, effectively cutting off all intercourse
between the south of England and the Midlands and north; and at some
place or other this road (afterwards known as Watling Street) had to
cross the barrier. It was inevitable that the spot where this crossing
was effected should be, both from a military and a commercial point
of view, a place of the very greatest importance. In the earliest
days the road skirted the south side of the marshes facing Llyndin,
and passed on to the ford (or ferry) at Westminster, and thence on to
Tyburn. But Llyndin was growing in strength, and the need of a lower
crossing was probably soon felt by the inhabitants of the little hill.
Now lower crossings of the River were by no means simple. As we said
just now, right from the mouth westwards till we reach the spot where
London now stands there was simply a great collection of marshes and
fens. Here and there, on both banks, tiny patches of firmer soil jutted
out from the impassable wastes—the spots where Purfleet and Grays now
stand on the north side, the sites of Gravesend, Greenhithe, Erith,
Woolwich, and Greenwich, on the south side; but in each of these cases
the little gravel bed or chalky bank was faced on the opposite shore by
the dreary flats (an ordinary natural happening caused by the washing
away of the banks, to be seen in any little stream that winds in and
out), so that never was there any possibility of linking up north and
south.

Only when the little hill at the junction of the River Thames with the
River Lea, somewhere about sixty miles from the open sea, was reached
could any such crossing be made. We said that in the earliest days of
London there was, facing the hill, a great flat which at high tide
became a wide lagoon, stretching southwards to Sydenham. Now this was
quite shallow; moreover, a long tongue of fairly firm gravel ran right
out northwards from the firmer ground till it came to a point nearly
opposite the Llyndin Hill. This firm bed enabled the Britons to lay
down, across the marsh, some sort of a road or causeway joining up with
the main Kent road, and so gave them another lower and practicable
crossing of the River, which, of course, meant a shorter road to the
Midlands and the north.

This crossing—in all probability a ferry—laid the foundation-stone of
the prosperity of London town, and the building of the first bridge
cemented that foundation.

Why? Simply because such a bridge, in addition to being a passage
_across_ the River, became a barrier to any passage up and down the
stream. Bridge-building was not at a very advanced stage, and, of
necessity, the arches were small and narrow. This effectively stopped
traffic passing up from the seaward side. On the other hand, the small
arches meant a very great current, and this, with any considerable
tide, rendered the “shooting” of the bridge by smaller boats an
extremely dangerous affair: thus traffic from the landward side came to
a standstill at the bridge.

This meant that ships, bringing goods up the River from the sea, must
stop at the bridge and discharge their cargoes: also that goods, coming
from inland to go to foreign parts, must of necessity be transhipped
at London. It was inevitable, therefore, that once the bridge was in
position a commercial centre must arise on the spot, and almost certain
that in time a great port would grow into being. So that we may say
quite truly that _the Thames founded London_.




CHAPTER TWO

_How the City grew_ (_Roman Days_)


Who built the first bridge? We cannot say for certain; but it is fairly
safe for us to assume that the Romans shortly after their arrival in
Llyndin set to work to make a strong wooden military bridge to link up
the town with the important road from Dover. Thousands of Roman coins
have been recovered from the bed of the Thames at this spot, and we
may quite well suppose that the Roman people dropped these through the
cracks as they crossed the roughly constructed bridge.

This bridge established London once and for all. Previously there had
been the two ferries—that of Thorney (Westminster) and that of Llyndin
Hill, each with its own growing settlement. Either of these rivals
might have developed into the foremost city of the valley. But the
building of the bridge definitely settled the question and caused the
diversion of Watling Street to a course across the bridge, through
the settlement, out by way of what was afterwards Newgate, and on to
Tyburn, where the old way was rejoined.

Having built the bridge, they set to work to make of London a city,
as they understood it. In all probability it was quite a flourishing
place when they found it. But the Romans had their own thoughts about
building, their own ideas of what a city should be. First, they built
a citadel. The original British stockade stood on the western hummock
of the twin hill, so the Romans chose the eastern height for their
defences. This citadel, or fortress, was a large and powerful one, with
massive walls which extended from where Cannon Street Station now is to
where Mincing Lane runs. Inside it the Roman soldiers lived in safety.

Gradually, however, the fortress ceased to be necessary, and a fine
town spread out beyond its walls, stretching as far eastwards and
westwards as Nature permitted; that is, to the marshes on the east and
to the Fleet ravine on the west. In this space were laid out fine
streets and splendid villas and public buildings. Along the banks of
the River were built quays and river walls; and trade increased by
leaps and bounds.

Nor was this all. The Romans, as you have probably read, made
magnificent roads across England, and London was practically the hub
of the series, which radiated in all directions. The old British road
through Kent became the Prætorian Way (afterwards the diverted Watling
Street), and passed through the city to the north and west. Another,
afterwards called Ermyn Street, led off to Norfolk and Suffolk. Yet
another important road passed out into Essex, the garden of England in
those days.

“How do we know all these things?” you ask. Partly by what Roman
writers tell us, and partly by all the different things which have been
brought to light during recent excavations. When men have been digging
the foundations of various modern buildings in different quarters of
London, they have discovered the remains of some of these splendid
buildings—all of them more or less ruined (for a reason which we shall
see later), but a few in good condition. Fine mosaic pavements have
been laid bare in one or two places—Leadenhall Street for one; and all
sorts of articles—funeral urns, keys, statues, ornaments, domestic
utensils, lamps, etc.—have been brought to light, many of which you can
still see if you take the trouble to visit the Guildhall Museum and the
London Museum. In a court off the Strand may still be seen an excellent
specimen of a Roman bath.

[Illustration:

ROMAN LONDON]

But perhaps the most interesting of all the Roman remains are the
two or three fragments of the great wall, which was not built till
somewhere between the years 350 and 365 A.D. At this time the Romans
had been in occupation for several hundred years, and the city had
spread quite a distance beyond the old citadel walls. The new wall
was a splendid one, twenty feet high and about twelve feet thick,
stretching for just about three miles. It ran along the river front
from the Fleet River to the corner where the Tower stands, inland to
Bishopsgate and Aldersgate, then across to Newgate, where it turned
south again, and came to the River not far from Blackfriars.

Several fine sections of the ancient structure can still be seen in
position. There is a large piece under the General Post Office yard,
another fine piece in some wine cellars close to Fenchurch Street
Station, a fair piece on Tower Hill, and smaller remnants in Old Bailey
and St. Giles’ Churchyard, Cripplegate.

[Illustration: BASTION OF ROMAN WALL, CRIPPLEGATE CHURCHYARD.]

What do these fragments teach us? That things were not all they should
be in London. Instead of being built with the usual care of Roman
masonry, with properly quarried and squared stones, this wall was made
up of a medley of materials. Mixed in with the proper blocks were odd
pieces of buildings, statues, columns from the temples, and memorials
from the burying grounds. Probably the folk of London, feeling that the
power of Rome was waning, were stricken with panic, and so set to work
hurriedly and with such materials as were to hand to put together this
great defence.

Nor were they unwise in their preparations, for danger soon began to
threaten. From time to time there swooped down on the eastern coasts
strange ships filled with fierce warriors—tall, fair-haired men,
who took what they could lay their hands on, and killed and burned
unsparingly. So long as the Roman soldiers were there to protect the
land and its people, nothing more happened than these small raids. The
strangers kept to the coasts and seldom attempted to penetrate up the
river which led to London.

But these coast raids only heralded the great storm which was
approaching, for the daring sea-robbers had set covetous eyes on the
fair fields of Britain.




CHAPTER THREE

_How the City grew_ (_Saxon Days_)


In the year 410 the Romans were compelled to leave Britain. Troubles
had become so great in Rome itself that it was necessary to abandon
all the outlying colonies to their fate. From that moment began a
century and a half of pitiful history for our country. There was now
no properly drilled army to ward off attacks; and the raids of the
“sea-robbers” increased in number and intensity. Saxons, Angles, and
Jutes, they came in vast numbers, gradually working their way inland
from the coast.

And what happened to Londinium, as the Romans called our city? We do
not know, for there is a great gap in our history; probably it perished
of starvation. We know that little by little the strangers increased
their grip—the Jutes in Kent and Hampshire (and later in Surrey), the
Saxons in Kent, Essex, and Sussex; and that as they did so London was
gradually surrounded.

Now London was a comparatively large place, with a considerable
population, even after the Romans had gone; and the slow tightening of
the Saxon grip must have meant starvation, for everything London wanted
for its use came from a distance, owing to the impossibility of growing
anything in the surrounding marshy districts. And in the absence of any
reliable account we can only assume that in consequence the inhabitants
little by little deserted the city, and made their way westwards; that
the quays were deserted, the ships rotted at their moorings, the finely
constructed streets were befouled with grass and briars, the splendid
villas fell to pieces, the great wall in places crumbled to ruins.
So that when eventually the Saxons did reach London, after years of
struggle and fierce engagements, their victory was a hollow one. And
there is much to support this assumption, for we find that in their
chronicles the Saxons make practically no mention of the first city
of the land, which they most assuredly would have done had it been
anything other than derelict. Nor did they stay at London when they
arrived. Probably such a place of desolation was of no use to them;
they were not interested in ruined cities; they wanted open ground with
growing crops. So they passed on, and London probably stood silent and
dead for years, the empty skeleton of a city, while Time and Nature
completed the ruin which savage assaulters might otherwise have carried
out. Thus we may conjecture ended the first of London’s three lives.

When, after a time, things settled down in Britain, a new London
began to rise on the site of the old city. Gradually the folk, mainly
the East Saxons, settled on the outskirts of the deserted city, and,
little by little, they made their way within the old walls; numbers of
the old fugitives crept back to join them; merchants came and patched
up the broken, grass-grown quays; houses were built; and life began
anew. Steadily the progress continued. At first the houses were rough
wattle-and-mud affairs, set down in any fashion on the old sites, but
gradually proper rows of small, timbered houses rose on all sides,
with numbers of little churches dotted here and there.

Then at the end of the eighth century the old trouble, invasion, began
again. This time it was the Vikings (or Danes), the adventurous spirits
of the fiords of Norway and the coasts of Denmark, men who risked the
terrors of the hungry North Sea that they might plunder the monasteries
and farms of the north and east of England. They, too, found our
country a fair place, after their own cold, forbidding coasts; and the
raids increased in frequency.

In the year 832 they were at the mouth of the Thames, landing in
Sheppey; and in 839 came their first attempt to sail up the Thames.
They were beaten off this time, but they had learned of a proper entry
to which they might return later. In 851 came their great attempt. With
three hundred and fifty of their long ships they came, sailed right up
the River to London Bridge, stormed and plundered the city. But their
triumph was short-lived, for their army was well beaten at Ockley in
Surrey, as it made its way southward down the Stane Street.

It seemed as if England and London might be tranquil once more; but
the Vikings came in still greater numbers, and began to winter in our
land instead of returning as had been their custom. The record of
the next twenty years is one of constant harrying, with great armies
marching throughout the countryside—plundering, killing, burning, with
apparently no object.

When Alfred came to the throne, London was practically a Danish city;
but he soon set to work and drove them out. And, though England
suffered long and often from these foes, from that time onwards, the
fortress being rebuilt, London never again fell to the invaders. When,
eventually, Canute did enter London in 1017, after a considerable but
entirely unsuccessful siege, it was at the invitation of the citizens,
who accepted him as their King.

Under this wise King followed an era of prosperity for the growing
city. Danish merchants settled within its walls; the wharves were busy
once again; foreign traders sailed up the River to Billingsgate, their
boats laden with wine, cloth, and spices from the East; and so rapidly
London became once more a great commercial centre. Indeed, such was
its size and importance that it paid one-fifth of the whole tax which
Canute levied on the kingdom.

From this time onward London progressed steadily; and so, too, did
that other city, Westminster, which had sprung into being at another
crossing, a few miles higher up the Thames—one more city made by the
River, as we shall see later on.




CHAPTER FOUR

_How the City grew_ (_Norman Days_)


The year 1066 was yet another fateful year for the people of England
and the citizens of London. When William of Normandy defeated Harold at
Senlac, near Hastings, many of the English fled to London, prepared to
join the citizens in a stout defence of their great city; but no such
defence was necessary.

[Illustration: THE CONQUEROR’S MARCH ON LONDON]

William skirted the dense forest of Andredeswealde, and, striking the
main road at Canterbury, progressed to Southwark, which he destroyed.
Now, good soldier and wise man that he was, William saw that a definite
attack on London would be a difficult matter, and would profit him
nothing. So he set to work to do what others had done before him—to cut
off the city from its supplies. Marching westwards, he made his way to
the crossing at Wallingford, and there reached the north bank of the
River. Striking north-east again, he came soon to Watling Street once
more, and thus cut off all the northern trade. London was in this way
cut off from practically the bulk of its supplies; and the citizens
were glad to make terms before worse things happened.

Probably the surrender occurred sooner than it might otherwise have
done, by reason of the exceedingly mixed nature of the population.
London counted among its citizens, as we can tell by reference to
the documents of the time, merchants from many different parts of
France—Caen and Rouen in particular—and from Flanders and Germany.

William kept loyally to the promises which he had made in the treaty,
maintaining the rights of the city, and seeing that the thirty or
forty thousand citizens had the proper protection he guaranteed. True,
he built the great threatening Tower of London, about which we shall
read in another chapter, but it is very probable that even in that the
citizens saw only a strengthening of the old bastions built in former
days for the guarding of the city.

Practically all our knowledge of London life in Norman days comes to us
from the writings of one FitzStephen, a faithful clerk in the service
of Thomas Becket. FitzStephen, who was present at the Archbishop’s
murder, wrote a life of his master, and prefaced it with a short
account of the city. From his description we learn much of interest.
We gather that, besides the great Cathedral, there were thirteen large
churches and one hundred and twenty-six smaller parish churches; that
the walls protected the city on all sides save the river front, where
they had been pulled down to make room for wharves and stores. Says
FitzStephen: “Those engaged in the several kinds of business, sellers
of various things, contractors for various works, are to be found every
morning in their different districts and shops. Besides there is in
London, on the river bank, among the wines in ships, and in cellars
sold by the vintners, a public food shop; there meats may be found
every day, according to the season, fried and boiled, great and small
fish, coarsest meats for the poor, more dainty for the rich.” He also
has much to tell us about the sports, which included archery, leaping,
wrestling, and football. “In Easter holidays they fight battles on
the water. A shield is hung upon a pole in mid-stream, a boat is made
ready, and in the forepart thereof standeth a youth, who chargeth the
shield with a lance. If so be that he breaketh the lance against the
shield, he hath performed a worthy deed; but if he doth not break his
lance, down he falleth into the water.... To this city, from every
nation under heaven, do merchants delight to bring their goods by
sea.... The only pests of London are the immoderate quaffing of fools
and the frequency of fires.”




CHAPTER FIVE

_The River’s First Bridge_


From our point of view, engaged as we are in the study of London’s
River and its influence on the city, perhaps the most interesting thing
that happened in Norman days was the building of the first stone London
Bridge.

Other bridges there had been from remote times, and these had taken
their part in the moulding of the history of London, but they had
suffered seriously from flood, fire, and warfare. In the year 1090,
for instance, a tremendous storm had burst on the city, and while the
wind blew down six hundred houses and several churches, the flood
had entirely demolished the bridge. The citizens had built another
in its place; but that, too, had narrowly escaped destruction when
there occurred one of those dreadful fires which FitzStephen laments.
The years 1135-6 again had brought calamity, for yet another fire
had practically consumed the entire structure. It had been remade,
however, and had lasted till 1163, when it had been found to be in such
a very bad condition that an entirely new bridge was a necessity.

[Illustration: OLD LONDON BRIDGE.]

The new bridge was the conception of one Peter, the priest of a small
church, St. Mary Colechurch, in the Poultry. This clergyman was a
member of a religious body whose special interest was the building
of bridges, in those times regarded as an act of piety. Skilled in
this particular craft, he dreamed of a bridge for London such as his
brother craftsmen were building in the great cities of France; and he
set to work to amass the necessary funds. King, courtiers, common
folk, all responded to his call, and at last, in 1176, he was able to
commence. Unfortunately, he died before the completion of his project,
for it took thirty-three years to build; and another brother, Isenbert,
carried on after him.

A strange bridge it was, too, when finished; but good enough to last
six and a half centuries. It was in reality a street built across the
River, 926 feet in length, 40 feet wide, and some 60 feet above the
level of high water. Nineteen pointed arches, varying in width from 10
to 32 feet, upheld its weight over massive piers which measured from 23
to 36 feet in thickness. So massive were these piers that probably only
about a third of the whole length of the Bridge was waterway. This,
of course, meant that the practice of “shooting” the arches in a boat
was a perilous adventure, for with such narrow openings the current
was tremendous. So dangerous was it that it was usual for timid folk
to disembark just above the Bridge, walk round the end, and re-embark
below, rather than take the risk of being dashed against the
stone-work. Which wisdom was embodied in a proverb of the time—“London
Bridge was made for wise men to go over and fools to go under.”

[Illustration: AN ARCH OF OLD LONDON BRIDGE: QUEEN ELEANOR BEING STONED
IN 1263.]

Strangely enough, old London Bridge forestalled the Tower Bridge by
having in its centre a drawbridge, which could be raised to allow
vessels to sail through, much as the bascules of the modern bridge can
be lifted to allow the passage of the great ships of to-day. There were
on each side of the roadway ordinary houses, the upper stories of which
were used for dwellings, while the ground floors acted as shops. In the
middle of the Bridge, over the tenth and largest pier, stood a small
chapel dedicated to St. Thomas of Canterbury, the youngest of England’s
saints.

But, even when a stone bridge was erected, troubles were by no means
over. Four years after the completion, in July, 1212, came another
disastrous fire, and practically all the houses, which, unlike the
Bridge itself, were built of timber, were destroyed. In the year 1282
it was the turn of the River to play havoc. As we said just now, only
about a third of the length was waterway. This condition of things
(avoided in all modern bridges) meant a tremendous pressure of the
current, both at ebb and flow, and an enormous pressure at flood time.
When, in the year mentioned, there came great ice-floods, five arches
were carried away, and “London Bridge was broken down, my fair lady.”
From that time onwards there was a considerable series of accidents
right down to the time of the Great Fire of London, concerning which we
shall read in a later chapter.

[Illustration: CHAPEL OF ST. THOMAS BECKET.]

Old London Bridge, during its life, saw many strange happenings. In
1263, for instance, a great crowd gathered, wherever the citizens could
find a coign of vantage, for the Queen, Eleanor of Provence and wife
of Henry III., was passing that way on her journey from the Tower to
Windsor. But this was no triumphal passage, for the Queen was strongly
opposed to the Barons, who were still working for a final settlement
of Magna Charta. Enraged at her action, the people of London waited
till her barge approached the Bridge, and then they hurled heavy stones
down upon it and assailed the Queen with rough words; so that she was
compelled with her attendants to return to the Tower, rather than face
the enraged mob.

The year 1390 saw yet another queer event. Probably most of you
understand what is meant by a tournament. Well, at this time, there
was much rivalry between the English and Scottish knights, and a tilt
was proposed between two champions, Lord Wells of England and Earl
Lindsay of Scotland. The Englishman, granted choice of ground, chose
by some strange whim London Bridge for the scene of action rather than
some well-known tournament ground. On the appointed day the Bridge
was thronged with folk who had come to witness this unusual contest
in the narrow street. Great was the excitement as the knights charged
towards each other. Three times did they meet in the shock of battle,
and at the third the Englishman fell vanquished from his charger, to be
attended immediately by the gallant Scottish knight.

[Illustration: LONDON BRIDGE IN MODERN TIMES.]

The Bridge, as the only approach to the city from the south, was the
scene of many wonderful pageants and processions, as our victorious
Kings came back from their wars with France, or returned to England
with their brides from overseas. Such a magnificent spectacle was the
crossing in state of Henry V. after the great victory of Agincourt
in the year 1415. The battle, as most of you know, took place in
October of that year, and at the end of November the King passed over
the Bridge at the head of his most distinguished prisoners and his
victorious soldiers, amid the tumultuous rejoicing of London’s jubilant
citizens.

Yet another strange scene was enacted when Wat Tyler, at the head of
his tens of thousands, passed over howling and threatening, after being
temporarily held back by the gates which stood at the south end of the
Bridge.

So the old Bridge lasted on, living through momentous days, till, in
the year 1832, it was removed to give place to the new London Bridge
which had been erected sixty yards to the westwards.




CHAPTER SIX

_How the City grew_ (_in the Middle Ages_)


London in that period which we speak of as the Middle Ages was indeed
a remarkable city. Dotted about all over it, north and south, west and
east, were great monasteries and nunneries and churches, for in those
days the Church was a tremendous power in the land; while huddled
together within its confines were shops, houses, stores, palaces,
all set down in a bewildering confusion. Of palaces there was indeed
a profusion; in fact, London might well have been called a City of
Palaces. But they were not arranged in long lines along the banks
of canals, as were those of Venice, nor round fine stately squares,
as in Florence, Genoa, and other famous cities of the Continent.
London’s palaces nestled in the city’s narrow, muddy lanes, between
the warehouses of the merchants and the hovels of the poor. They
paid little or no attention to external beauty, but within they were
splendid structures.

Now, what did this mean? That the common people of London constantly
came into contact with the great ones of the land. The apprentice, sent
on an errand by his master, might at any moment be held up as Warwick
the King-maker, let us say, emerged from his gateway, followed by a
train of several hundred retainers all decked out in his livery; or the
Queen and her ladies might pass in gay procession to view a tournament
in the fields just north of the Chepe. In that way the citizens learned
right from their earliest day that London was not the only place in
England, that there were other folk in the land, and great ones too,
who were not London merchants and craftsmen.

This constant reminder that they were simply part and parcel of the
great realm of England did this for the people of London: it made them
keen on politics, always ready to take sides in any national strife. On
the other hand, it gave them great pride. The citizens soon discovered
that, though they were not the only folk in the land, they counted for
much, for whatever side or cause they supported always won in the end.
This, of course, more firmly cemented the position of London as the
foremost spot in the kingdom.

Very beautiful indeed were some of the palaces, or inns, as they were
quite commonly called. They were in no sense of the word fortresses;
their gates opened straight on to the narrow, muddy lanes without
either ditch or portcullis. Inside there was usually a wide courtyard,
surrounded by the various buildings. Unfortunately the Great Fire and
other calamities have not spared us much whereby we can recall such
palaces to mind. Staple Inn, whose magnificent timbered front is still
one of London’s most precious relics, is of a later date, but possesses
many of the medieval characters. Crosby Hall, in Bishopsgate Street,
was a fine specimen. This was erected in the fifteenth century by a
grocer and Lord Mayor, Sir John Crosby, a man of great wealth; and
for some time it was the residence of Richard III. For many years it
remained to show us the exceeding beauty of a medieval dwelling; but,
alas, that too has gone the way of all the others! A portion of it, the
great Hall, has been re-erected in Chelsea.

[Illustration: BAYNARD’S CASTLE BEFORE THE GREAT FIRE.]

Otherwise most of these palaces remain only as a name. Baynard’s
Castle, one of the most famous of all, which stood close to the western
end of the river-wall, lasted for 600 years from the Norman Conquest to
the time of the Great Fire, but it is only remembered in the name of a
wharf and a ward of the city. Coldharbour Palace, which stood in Thames
Street with picturesque gables overhanging the River, passed from a
great place in history down to oblivion.

So with all the rest of these elaborate, historic palaces, about which
we can read in the pages of Stow, that delightful chronicler of London
and her ways; they either perished in the flames or were pulled down to
make way for hideous commercial buildings.

London in the Middle Ages passed through a period of great prosperity;
but, at the same time, it suffered terribly through pestilence, famine,
rebellions, and so on. The year 1349 saw a dreadful calamity in the
shape of the “Black Death”—a kind of plague which came over from
Asia. The narrow, dirty lanes, with their stinking, open ditches, the
unsatisfactory water-supply, all caused the dread disease to spread
rapidly; and a very large part of London’s citizens perished.

Moreover, famine followed in the path of the pestilence which stalked
through the land. So great was the toll of human life throughout
England that there were but few left to work on the land; and London,
which depended for practically all its supplies on what was sent from
afar, suffered severely. Still, despite all these troubles, the Middle
Ages must be regarded as part of the “good old times,” when England
was “merry England” indeed. True, the citizens had to work hard, and
during long hours, but they found plenty of time for pleasure. Those of
you who have read anything of Chaucer’s “Canterbury Tales” will know
something of the brightness of life in those times, of the holidays,
the pageants and processions, the tournaments, the fairs, the general
merrymaking.

All of which, of course, was due to good trade. The city which the
River had made was growing in strength. London now made practically
everything it needed, and within its walls were representatives of
practically every calling. As Sir Walter Besant says in his fine book,
“London”: “There were mills to grind the corn, breweries for making
the beer; the linen was spun within the walls, and the cloth made and
dressed; the brass pots, tin pots, iron utensils, and wooden platters
and basins, were all made in the city; the armour, with its various
pieces, was hammered out and fashioned in the streets; all kinds of
clothes, from the leathern jerkin of the poorest to the embroidered
robes of a princess, were made here....

“There was no noisier city in the whole world; the roar and the racket
of it could be heard afar off, even at the risings of the Surrey hills
or the slope of Highgate. From every lane rang out, without ceasing,
the tuneful note of the hammer and the anvil; the carpenters, not
without noise, drove in their nails, and the coopers hooped their
casks; the blacksmith’s fire roared; the harsh grating of the founders
set the teeth on edge of those who passed that way; along the river
bank, from the Tower to Paul’s Stairs, those who loaded and those who
unloaded, those who carried the bales to the warehouses, those who
hoisted them up; the ships which came to port and the ships which
sailed away, did all with fierce talking, shouting, quarrelling, and
racket.”

As we picture the prosperity of those medieval days there comes into
our minds that winding silver stream which made such prosperity
possible, and we seem to see the River Thames crowded with ships from
foreign parts, many of them bringing wine from France, Spain, and other
lands, for wine was one of the principal imports of the Middle Ages,
and filling up the great holds of their empty vessels with England’s
superior wool; others from Italy, laden with fine weapons and jewels,
with spices, drugs, and silks, and all wanting our wool. A few of those
ships in the Pool were laden with _coal_, for in the Middle Ages this
new fuel—sea-coal, as it was called to distinguish it from the ordinary
wood charcoal—made its appearance in London. Nor did London take to
it at first. In the reign of Edward I. the citizens sent a petition,
praying the King to forbid the use of this “nuisance which corrupteth
the air with its stink and smoke, to the great detriment of the health
of the people.”

But the advantages of the sea-coal rapidly outweighed the disadvantages
with the citizens, and the various proclamations issued by sovereigns
came to nought. Before long several officials were appointed to act as
inspectors of the new article of commerce as it came into the wharves.
The famous Dick Whittington and various other prominent citizens of
London made large fortunes from their coal-boats.




CHAPTER SEVEN

_The Tower of London_


London has many treasures to show us, if we take the trouble to look
for them, but it has no relic of the past so perfect as its Tower—a
place which every Briton, especially every Londoner, ought to see and
try to understand.

If only the Tower’s silent old stones could suddenly gain the power
of speech, what strange tales they would have to tell of the things
which have occurred during their centuries of history—tales of things
glorious and tales of things unspeakably tragic. Though the latter
would easily outweigh the former in number, I am afraid; for this grim
stronghold is a monument to evil rather than to good.

The Tower has often been spoken of as the _key_ to London, and there is
truth in the saying, for its position is certainly an excellent one.
When William of Normandy descended on England with his great company of
knights and their retainers, he professed to have every consideration
for the people of London, and certainly he treated the citizens quite
fairly according to the terms of the treaty. But, at the same time, he
apparently did not feel any too sure of them, and so he called in the
monk, Gundulf, to erect a fortress, which to all appearances was merely
a strengthening of the fortifications already there, but which in
reality was intended to serve as a constant reminder of the power and
authority of the conquering king.

The spot chosen was the angle at the eastern corner, just where the
wall turns sharply inland from the River, and no position round London
could have been better chosen. In the first place it guarded London
from the river approach, ready to hold off any enemy venturesome
enough to sail up the Thames to attack the city. But also, and this
undoubtedly was what was in the mind of the Conqueror, it frowned down
on the city.

A formidable Norman Keep was erected, with walls 15 feet thick, so
strongly built that they stand to-day practically as they stood 900
years ago, save that stone-faced windows were put in a couple of
centuries ago to take the place of the narrow slits or loopholes which
served for light and ventilation in a fortress of this sort.

[Illustration: GROUND PLAN OF THE TOWER.]

To understand the Tower of London properly (and we really want some
idea of it before any visit, otherwise it is merely a confusion of
towers and open spaces without any meaning) we must realize that it
consists of three separate lines of defences, all erected at different
times. The innermost, the Keep or White Tower, we have touched upon.
Beyond that, and separated from it by an open space known as the
Inner Ward, is the first wall, with its twelve towers, among them the
Beauchamp Tower, the Bell Tower, the Bloody Tower, and the Wakefield
Tower. Then, beyond that again, and separated by another open space
known as the Outer Ward, is yet another wall; and still beyond is
the Moat, outside everything. So that any attacking army, having
successfully negotiated the Moat, would find itself with the outer wall
to scale and break, and within that another inner wall, 46 feet high.
The garrison, driven back from these two, could even then retire to the
innermost keep, with its walls 15 feet thick, and there hold out for a
great length of time against the fiercest attacks. So that, you will
readily see, the Tower was a fortress of tremendous strength in days
before the use of heavy artillery.

The outer defences were added to William’s White Tower from time to
time by various monarchs. The first or inner wall, 8 feet thick, begun
in the Conqueror’s days, was added to and strengthened by Stephen,
Henry II., and John. The outer wall and the Moat were completed by
Henry II.; and the Tower thus took its present shape.

Most of our Sovereigns, from the Conqueror’s time right down to the
Restoration, used the Tower of London. Kings and Queens who were
powerful used it as a prison for their enemies; those who were weak and
feared the people used it as a fortress for themselves. This latter
use of the Tower was particularly instanced in the reign of Stephen—an
illuminating chapter in the story of London.

Stephen, following the death of Henry I., was elected King by the
Great Council, and duly crowned in London; but the barons soon saw
that he was unfitted for the task of ruling, and they took sides with
the Empress Matilda, hoping thereby to get nearer the independence
they desired. Stephen for a time held his own with the aid of a number
of trusty barons, but in 1139 he offended the Church by his rough
treatment of the Bishops of Lincoln and Salisbury, and his supporters
fell away. Consequently he was compelled in the following year to seek
safety in the Tower, close to his loyal followers, the citizens of
London.

Now the constable of the Tower in those days was one Geoffrey de
Mandeville, about as unscrupulous and cruel a rascal as could be
imagined. Stephen, to ensure his support, made him Earl of Essex, and
for a time all went well. But when, following Stephen’s defeat and
capture in 1141, the Empress Matilda moved to London to be crowned,
Geoffrey de Mandeville had not the slightest compunction in taking
sides with her, for which he was rewarded by the gift of castles,
revenues, and the office of Sheriff of Essex. But Matilda offended
the citizens of London to such an extent that they drove her from
the city and attacked Mandeville in the Tower. Whereupon Mandeville,
without any hesitation, transferred his allegiance to Maud of Boulogne,
Stephen’s wife, who was rallying his scattered forces—which allegiance
was purchased by making Mandeville the Sheriff of Hertfordshire,
Middlesex, and London, as well. Nothing, however, could serve to make
this treacherous man act straightly, and when later Stephen found him
planning yet another revolt in favour of Matilda, he attacked him
suddenly, took him prisoner, and removed him from all public affairs.

This chapter in English history is far from showing the English nobles
in a good light, but it is exceedingly interesting as revealing the
extent to which London was beginning to count in the kingdom.

To-day we enter from the city side by what is known as the Middle
Tower—a renovated and modernized gateway, with a big, stone-carved
Royal Arms above its arch. The name “Middle” strikes us as curious,
seeing that it is the first protection on the landward side, until we
remember or learn that originally there was another Tower, the Lion
Tower, nearer the city (approximately where the refreshment room now
stands) and separated from the Middle Tower by a drawbridge. But the
Lion Tower disappeared many many years ago, and only two of the three
outer defences remain, the Middle Tower and the Byward Tower, the
latter reached by a permanent bridge over the Moat.

Once through the Byward Gateway and we are between the inner and outer
defences. Leaving on our left the Bell Tower, a strong, irregular,
octagonal tower, which gets its name from the turret whence curfew
bell rings each night, we walk along parallel to the River, past the
frowning gateway of the Bloody Tower on our left, with its low arch
which originally gave the only entrance to the Inner Ward, and on our
right, and exactly opposite, the Traitor’s Gate, the riverside passage
through the outer walls. Skirting the Wakefield Tower, we pass through
a comparatively modern opening, and so come upon the amazing Norman
Keep of William the Conqueror.

This Keep is not quite square, though it appears to be, and no one of
its four sides corresponds to any other. Its greatest measurements are
from north to south 116 feet, and from east to west 96 feet. Inside,
three cross walls, from 6 to 8 feet thick, divide each floor into three
separate apartments of unequal sizes. It is a building complete in
itself, with everything required for a fortress, a Royal dwelling, and
a prison. Probably, as you walk about the cold, gloomy chambers, you
will say to yourselves that you can understand the fortress and the
prison parts, but that you could never imagine it as a dwelling. But
you must remember that with coverings on the floor and with the bare
walls hung with beautiful tapestries, as was the custom in early days,
and with furniture in position, the apartments must have presented a
much more comfortable appearance.

The first story, or main floor, was the place where abode the
garrison—the men-at-arms and their officers; and above on the other two
floors were the State apartments—St. John’s Chapel and the Banqueting
Hall on the second story, and the great Council Chamber of the
Sovereign on the third floor. Beneath were great dungeons, terrible
places without light or ventilation, having in those days no entrance
from the level ground, but reached only by that central staircase which
rose from them to the roof.

In these days the Keep is largely used as an armoury; and we can gain a
fine idea of the different kinds of armour worn in different periods,
and of the weapons used and of the cruel implements of torture. It
also contains several good models of the Tower at different times, and
a short study of these will do much to get rid of the confusion which
most folk feel as they hurry from tower to tower without any general
idea of the place.

Leaving the ancient Keep, we cross the only wide open space of
the fortress, a paved quadrangle which keeps its antique and now
inappropriate name of Tower Green, where in bygone days some of the
Tower’s most famous prisoners have paraded in solitude on the grass.
Here, marked by a tablet, is the site of the scaffold where died Lady
Jane Grey, Anne Boleyn, Katherine Howard, and other famous prisoners of
State. It is a quiet, moody spot, where the black ravens of the Tower,
as they stand sentinel beneath the sycamore trees, at times seem the
only things in keeping with the sadness of the place.

To our right is the little Church of St. Peter ad Vinculam, which will
be shown to us by one of the quaintly garbed “Beef-eaters” (if one
can be spared from other duties), the famous Yeomen of the Guard who
still wear the uniform designed in Henry the Eighth’s days. Concerning
this little sanctuary Lord Macaulay wrote: “There is no sadder spot on
earth.... Death is there associated with whatever is darkest in human
nature and in human destiny, with the savage triumph of implacable
enemies, with the inconstancy, the ingratitude, the cowardice of
friends, with all the miseries of fallen greatness and of blighted
fame. Thither have been carried through successive ages, by the rude
hands of gaolers, without one mourner following, the bleeding relics of
men who had been the captains of armies, the leaders of parties, the
oracles of senates, and the ornaments of courts.”

Close together in a small space before the Altar, raised slightly
above the level of the floor, lie the mortal remains of two Queens,
Anne Boleyn and Katherine Howard, Margaret of Salisbury, last of the
proud Plantagenets, Lord and Lady Rochford, the Dukes of Somerset,
Northumberland, Monmouth, Suffolk, and Norfolk, the Earl of Essex, Lady
Jane Grey, Lord Guilford Dudley, and Sir Thomas Overbury.

As we pass on and come to the Beauchamp Tower, and later to the Bloody
Tower, we see the tiny prisons where these unfortunates, and many
others, languished in confinement, waiting their tragic end, whiling
away the weary hours by carving quaint inscriptions on the stone walls;
and, in the latter, we are shown the tiny apartment where perished the
little Princes at the instigation of their uncle, Richard III.

From our point of view there remains just one more thing to consider,
and that is the Tower’s connection with the River. Probably few of us,
as we try to think back through the centuries, realize how important
the Thames was even as a highway. We know from our reading that
London’s streets were narrow, crooked, and of very little use for a
big amount of traffic; yet we do not see in our mind’s eye the great
waterway which everybody, rich and poor, used in those days, alike
for business and pleasure. And, of course, the Tower contributed very
largely to this water traffic, for the King, his nobles, and all who
had business at Westminster, travelled constantly to and fro in the
great painted barges which made the River a gayer and brighter place
than it is in our days. For the purpose of such travellers there was
provided the Queen’s Steps at the Tower Wharf, in order to avoid the
use of the sinister Traitor’s Gate—that low, frowning archway, which
gave entrance from the River, and through which very many famous
persons, innocent and guilty alike, passed to their doom, brought
thither by water at the behest of the Sovereign.

[Illustration: TRAITOR’S GATE.]

According to John Stow, who wrote in Elizabeth’s reign, the Tower
was then “a citadel to defend or command the city; a royal palace
for assemblies or treaties; a prison of state for the most dangerous
offenders; the only place of coinage for all England at this time; the
armoury for warlike provision; the treasury of the ornaments and jewels
of the Crown; and general conserver of most records of the King’s
courts of justice at Westminster.” All that is changed now. The Tower
has long since ceased to be a Royal residence. As a defence of the city
it would not last more than a few minutes against modern artillery.
Save for the period of the great war, when it held the bodies of
numerous spies and traitors and saw the execution of several, it has
for many years given up its claim to be a prison. The records which
filled the little Chapel of St. John have now been moved to the Record
Office, and the making of money goes on at the Mint just across the
road. The Crown Jewels still find a home here, in the Wakefield Tower,
the prison where Henry VI. came to his violent end. Yet, despite all
these changes, the fortress is still the Tower of London—perhaps the
city’s most fascinating relic.




CHAPTER EIGHT

_How Fire destroyed what the River had made_


Leaving the Tower by the Byward Gate, and passing along Great Tower
Street and Eastcheap, we come to the spot

“Where London’s column pointing to the skies, Like a tall bully, lifts
its head and lies.”

This is, of course, the Monument, which for many years indicated to
all and sundry that the Great Fire of 1666 was the work of the Roman
Catholics. Till the year 1831 the inscription, added in 1681 at the
time of the Titus Oates affair, perpetuated the lie in stone, but in
that year it was removed by the City Council. Now the gilt urn with
its flames, which we can see well if we ascend the 345 steps to the
iron cage at the top, merely commemorates the Fire itself, without any
reference to its cause, as in the original structure. From the top
of the Monument we can get perhaps the very finest of all views of
London and its River.

[Illustration: THE MONUMENT.]

But there is one thing which should preface our account of the Great
Fire, and that is an account of the Great Plague which visited and
afflicted London in the previous year. Of course, the Fire was in one
sense a terrible disaster for London, yet the destruction which it
wrought was in reality a great blessing to the plague-ridden city.

The Plague, by no means the first to visit London, came over from the
Continent, where for years it had been decimating the large cities. It
broke out with terrible power in the summer of the year 1665—a dry,
scorching summer which made the flushing of the open street drains an
impossible thing, and gave every help to the dread pestilence. If we
want to read a thrilling description of London at this time we have
only to turn to the “Journal of the Plague Year,” by Defoe, the author
of “Robinson Crusoe.” This was not actually a journal, for Defoe was
only four years old in 1665, but it was a faithful account based on
first-hand information. In its simply written pages (to quote from
Sir Walter Besant) “we see the horror of the empty streets; we hear
the cries and lamentations of those who are seized and those who are
bereaved. The cart comes slowly along the streets with the man ringing
a bell and crying, ‘Bring out your dead! Bring out your dead!’ We think
of the great holes into which the dead were thrown in heaps and covered
with a little earth; we think of the grass growing in the streets;
the churches deserted; the roads black with fugitives hurrying from
the abode of Death; we hear the frantic mirth of revellers snatching
to-night a doubtful rapture, for to-morrow they die. The City is filled
with despair.” As we can well imagine, the King and his courtiers fled
from Whitehall and the Tower away into the country; the Law Courts were
shifted up river to Oxford. Naturally all business stopped, and trade
was at a standstill. Ships in hundreds lay idle in the Pool, waiting
for the cargoes which came not, because the wharves and warehouses
were deserted; laden ships that sailed up the Thames speedily turned
about and made for the Continental ports. So it went on, the visitation
increasing in fury, till in September there were nearly 900 fell each
day. Then it abated slightly, but continued through the winter, on into
the following summer, and in the end more than 97,000 people perished
out of a population of 460,000.

Then, on September 2, came that other catastrophe, the Great Fire.
Starting in a baker’s shop in Pudding Lane, near the Monument, it was
driven westwards by a strong east wind.

The London of Stuart days gave the Fire every possible help. Not much
survives to-day to show us what things were like, but the quaint,
timber-fronted houses of Staple Inn (Holborn) and No. 17, Fleet Street,
and the pictures painted at the time, give us a fair idea of the
inflammable nature of the buildings; and when we remember that these
wooden houses, old, dry, and coated with pitch, were in some streets so
close to those opposite that it was possible to shake hands from the
overhanging upper stories, we are not surprised at the rapidity with
which the Fire spread.

The diaries of two gentlemen—Samuel Pepys and John Evelyn, the former
one of the King’s Ministers, the latter a wealthy and learned gentleman
of the Court—bring home to us plainly the terror of the seven days’
visitation. To begin with, very few took any special notice of the
outbreak: fires were too common to cause great consternation. Even
Pepys himself tells us that he returned to bed; but when the morning
came and it was still burning, he was disturbed. Says he: “By and by
Jane tells me that she hears that above 800 houses have been burned
down to-night by the fire we saw, and that it is now burning down all
Fish Street, by London Bridge. So I made myself ready presently, and
walked to the Tower; and there got up upon one of the high places; and
there I did see the houses at that end of the bridge all on fire, and
an infinite great fire on this and the other side of the end of the
bridge.”

London Bridge, as you will remember from a former chapter, was very
narrow, and the houses projected out over the River, held in place
by enormous timber struts; and these, with the wooden frames of the
three-storied houses, gave the fire a good hold. Moreover the burning
buildings, falling on the Bridge, blocked the way to any who would
have fought the flames. After about a third of the buildings had been
destroyed the fire was stopped by the pulling down of houses and the
open space; but not before it had done great damage to the stone
structure itself. The heat was so intense that arches and piers which
had remained firm for centuries now began to show signs of falling to
pieces, and it was found necessary to spend £1,500, an enormous sum in
those days, on repairs before any rebuilding could be attempted.

Day after day the Fire continued. Says Evelyn: “It burned both in
breadth and length, the churches, public halls, Exchange, hospitals,
monuments, and ornaments, leaping after a prodigious manner from
house to house and street to street, at great distances one from the
other....

“Here we saw the Thames covered with goods floating, all the barges
and boats laden with what some had time and courage to save, as, on
the other, the carts, etc., carrying out to the fields, which for many
miles were strewed with movables of all sorts, and tents erected to
shelter both people and what goods they could get away....

“(Sept. 7) At my return I was infinitely concerned to find that goodly
Church (cathedral), St. Paul’s, now a sad ruin. It was astonishing to
see what immense stones the heat had in a manner calcined, so that
all the ornaments, columns, friezes, capitals, and projectures of
massie Portland stone flew off, even to the very roof, where a sheet
of lead covering a great space (no less than six acres by measure)
was totally melted; the ruins of the vaulted roof falling broke into
St. Faith’s, which being filled with the magazines of books belonging
to the Stationers, and carried thither for safety, they were all
consumed, burning for a week following.... Thus lay in ashes that
most venerable Church, one of the most ancient pieces of early
piety in the Christian world, besides near 100 more. The exquisitely
wrought Mercers’ Chapel, the sumptuous Exchange, the august fabric of
Christchurch, all the rest of the Companies’ Halls, splendid buildings,
arches, entries, all in dust....

[Illustration: OLD ST. PAUL’S (A.D. 1500).]

“The people who now walked about the ruins appeared like men in some
dismal desert or rather in some great city laid waste by a cruel
enemy....The by-lanes and narrower streets were quite filled up with
rubbish, nor could one have possibly known where he was, but by the
ruins of some Church or Hall, that had some remarkable tower or
pinnacle remaining....”

Just as the Plague was by no means the first plague which had visited
the city, so there had been other serious outbreaks of fire, but those
two visitations were by far the worst in the history of London. We can
gather some idea of the scene of desolation which resulted when we read
that the ruins covered an area of 436 acres—387 acres, or five-sixths
of the entire city within the walls and 73 acres without; that the Fire
wiped out four city gates, one cathedral, eighty-nine parish churches,
the Royal Exchange, Sion College, and all sorts of hospitals, schools,
etc.

Yet gradually, not within three or four years, as is commonly stated
in history books, but slowly, as the ruined citizens found money for
the purpose, there rose from the débris another London—a London with
broader, cleaner streets, with larger and better-built houses of stone
and brick; with fine public buildings and a new Cathedral—a London more
like the city which we know. So _modern_ London began its life.

The River did not make a new London as it had made the old city. Shops,
markets, quays, public buildings, did not spring up naturally in places
where the trade of the time demanded them, as they had done in the old
days, otherwise much would have changed. Instead, the new city very
largely rebuilt itself on the foundations of the old, quite regardless
of comfort or utility.

Its supremacy as a Port was never in doubt. With the tremendous break
in London’s commerce, caused first by the Plague and then by the
devastation of the Fire, it would have seemed possible for the shipping
to decrease permanently; but it never did. So firmly was London Port
established in the past that it lived on strongly into modern times,
despite many excellent reasons why it should lose its great place.




CHAPTER NINE

_The Riverside and its Palaces_


To-day, when we stand upon Waterloo Bridge and let our gaze rest upon
the Embankment, as it sweeps round in the large arc of a circle from
Blackfriars past Charing Cross to Westminster, it is hard indeed to
picture the time when these massive buildings—hotels, public buildings,
suites of offices, etc.—were not there, when the green grass grew
right down to the water’s edge on the left _strand_ or bank of the
River, when a walk from the one city to the other was a walk through
country lanes and fields. It is hard indeed to brush away all the ugly,
grey reminders of the present, and see a little of the past in its
beauty—for beautiful the River undoubtedly was in Plantagenet, Tudor,
and Stuart times.

We have spoken of the growth of the city, and what the River meant
to it; of the wharves and warehouses which extended from the Tower
to the Fleet River. That was the commercial London of those days.
Westwards from the Fleet, along the side of the Thames, spread the more
picturesque signs of London’s prosperity—the dwellings of some of the
wealthy and influential.

[Illustration: THE FLEET RIVER AT BLACKFRIARS (A.D. 1760).]

From the western end of the city—Ludgate and Newgate—spread out
westwards the suburbs, part of the city, though not actually within
its walls, until an outer limit was reached at Temple Bar, situated at
the western extremity of one of London’s most famous thoroughfares,
Fleet Street, named after the little river which flowed down where
Farringdon and New Bridge Streets are, and which emptied itself, and
still empties itself, in the shape of a main drain, into the Thames
beneath Blackfriars Bridge.

Between Fleet Street and the River stood the Convent of the White
Friars, and that most famous of places the Temple.

In the Middle Ages the Church was far more intimately concerned with
the everyday life of the people than it is to-day, for the simple
reason that the clergy attended to the care of the sick and aged, to
the teaching of the young, and other charitable works. Now it must be
understood that there were in this country two classes of clergy—the
monks, who were known as “regular clergy” (who lived by a regulus
or rule), and the ordinary clergy, much as we have them to-day, in
charge of our cathedrals, parish churches, etc., these last being
known as “secular clergy.” For the upkeep of the Church folk paid
what were known as “tithes.” To begin with, this “tithe,” or tax, was
handed over to the bishop, who divided it out into four parts—one for
the building itself, one for the poor, one for the priest, and one
for himself. Gradually, however, the “regulars” obtained control of
affairs, receiving the tithes, and, instead of giving the full quarters
to the “seculars,” they simply paid them what they thought fit, and
appropriated the remainder for themselves. This led to two things:
the monasteries became enormously wealthy, and the seculars became
exceedingly poor and dissatisfied; so that there was constant strife
between the two branches. Many nobles, ignorant of the true condition
of affairs, and wishing the excellent charitable work of the Church to
be continued, made great gifts to the Church. Unfortunately these very
great gifts were sometimes apt to do the very opposite to what their
donors intended. Instead of the monks devoting themselves more and
more earnestly to the care of the needy, they began to think more of
their own comfort and position. They erected for themselves extensive
and comfortable dwellings, with their own breweries, mills, and farms,
and they lived on the fat of the land. They indulged themselves until
their luxury became a byword with the common people. Then arose two
great teachers, St. Francis of Assisi and St. Dominic, who were led
to protest against the abuses. They founded new Orders of religious
men—called the Friars—who went from place to place with no money and
only such clothes as covered them. These men believed in and taught the
blessedness of poverty.

Many of them came over from the Continent and settled in various parts
of the city. If you pick up a map of London, even one of to-day, you
will see such names as Blackfriars, Whitefriars, Crutched Friars,
Austin Friars—showing where they made their homes. Some, the Black
Friars, took up a position and eventually built for themselves a fine
monastery and church just outside the city walls at the mouth of
the Fleet River. Others, the White Friars or Carmelite Monks, made
themselves secure just to the west of the Fleet.

Whitefriars was one of London’s sanctuaries; within its precincts
wrong-doers were safe from the arm of the Law. Now, in certain periods
of our history, such things as sanctuaries were good; they frequently
prevented innocent men and women suffering at the hands of tyrants and
unscrupulous enemies. So that the right of sanctuary was always most
jealously guarded. But, as time went on, this led to abuses, and when
the monasteries were closed by Henry VIII., the Lord Mayor of London
asked the King to abolish the sanctuary rights of Blackfriars; but he
would not do so. The consequence was that Blackfriars and Whitefriars,
particularly the latter, became sinks of iniquity. In the latter, which
was nicknamed Alsatia, congregated criminals of all sorts—thieves,
coiners, forgers, debtors, cut-throats, burglars—as we can read in
Scott’s novel, “The Fortunes of Nigel.” For years it held its evil
associations, but it became so bad that in 1697 there was passed a
Bill abolishing for ever the sanctuary rights of Whitefriars.

West of Whitefriars is the Temple, which, with its quiet old
courtyards, its beautiful church, and its restful gardens stretching
down to the Embankment, is one of London’s most fascinating places.

It gets its name from its founders, the Knights Templars—a great Order
of men who lived in the time of the Crusades, and whose white mantles
with a red cross have been famous ever since. These knights, who took
vows to remain unmarried and poor, set themselves the great task of
guarding the pilgrims’ roads to the Holy Land.

In 1184 the Red Cross Knights settled on the banks of the River Thames,
and made their home there in what was called the New Temple. For 130
years they abode there, gradually increasing in wealth and power, till
in the end their very strength defeated them. Princes and nobles who
had given them great gifts of money for their worthy work saw that
money used, not for charitable purposes, but to keep up the pomp and
luxury of the place, and soon various folk in high places coveted the
Templars’ wealth and power, and determined to defeat them.

So well did these folk work that in 1313 the Order was broken up, and
the property came into the King’s hands. A few years later the Temple
was leased by the Crown to those men who were studying the Law in
London, and in their hands it has been ever since, becoming their own
property in the reign of King James I.

Originally the Temple was divided into three parts—the Inner Temple,
the Outer Temple, and the Middle Temple. The Outer Temple, which stood
west of Temple Bar, and therefore outside the city, was pulled down
years ago, and now only the two remain.

Here in their chambers congregate the barristers who conduct the cases
in the Law Courts just across the road; and here are still to be found
the students, all of whom must spend a certain time in the Temple (or
in one of the other Inns of Court—Gray’s Inn or Lincoln’s Inn) before
being allowed to practise as a barrister.

[Illustration: OLD TEMPLE BAR, FLEET STREET (NOW AT THEOBALD’S PARK).]

The Temple Church, which belongs to both Inns of Court, is one of the
few pieces of Norman architecture which survive to us in London. It
is round in shape, now a rare thing. On the floor, and in many other
places, may be seen the Templars’ emblem—the red cross on a white
ground with the Paschal Lamb in the centre. Figures of departed knights
keep watch over this strange church, their legs crossed to signify (so
it is said) that they had fought in one or other of the Crusades.

[Illustration:

The Strand from the ... Castle Hill. Ealing. York House. Durham House.
Bedford House.]

[Illustration:

... Thames in the XVI^{cent} Temple Church. Somerset House. Arundel
House. Essex House. Whitefriars Stairs.]

The Temple Gardens, which still run down to the Embankment, were one
time famous for their roses, and, according to Shakespeare, were the
scene of that famous argument which led to the bitter struggle known as
the War of the Roses. You probably remember the famous passage, ending
with the lines—

“And here I prophesy—this brawl to-day, Grown to this faction in the
Temple Garden, Shall send between the red rose and the white A thousand
souls to death and deadly night.”

_First Part of King Henry VI._, Act II. Sc. 4.

Westwards from the Temple as far as Westminster stretched a practically
unbroken line of palaces, each standing in beautiful grounds which
sloped down in terraces to the water’s edge. There was Somerset House,
which for long was a Royal residence. Lord Protector Somerset began
the building of it in 1549, pulling down a large part of St. Paul’s
cloisters and also the churches of St. John’s, Clerkenwell, and St.
Mary’s le Strand to provide the materials for his builders; but long
before its completion Somerset was executed for treason, and the
property went to the Crown.

Here Elizabeth lived occasionally while her sister Mary was reigning.
The old palace was pulled down in 1756, and the present fine building
erected on the site. This modern structure, with its fine river front,
so well combines strength and elegance that it seems a pity it does not
stand clear of other buildings.

The rest of the palaces, westwards, survive for the most part only as
names. Where now rises the great mass of the Savoy Hotel once stood
the ancient Palace of the Savoy, rising, like some of the city houses,
straight out of the River, with a splendid water-gate in the centre.
It was the oldest of the Strand palaces, being built by Peter of
Savoy as early as 1245. After various ownerships, it passed into the
hands of John of Gaunt, and was his when it was plundered and almost
entirely burnt down by the followers of Wat Tyler in 1381. From that
time onwards it had a chequered existence, being in turn prison and
hospital, till at last in 1805 it was swept away when the approach to
Waterloo Bridge was made. There is still in the street leading down to
the Embankment the tiny Chapel Royal of the Savoy, but it has been too
often restored to have much more interest than a name.

Where now comes the Cecil Hotel stood originally the famous palace or
inn of the Cecils, the Earls of Salisbury. York House, the town palace
of the Archbishops of York, stood where now is Charing Cross Station.
This at one time belonged to the famous Steenie, Duke of Buckingham and
favourite of James I. Buckingham pulled down the old house in order
that another and more glorious might rise in its place; but this was
never done. Only the water-gate was built, and this lovely relic still
stands in the Embankment Gardens, and from its position, some distance
behind the river-wall, shows us how skilful engineers have saved quite
a wide strip of the foreshore.

In all probability each of these Strand palaces had its water-gate,
from which the nobles and their ladies set out in their gay barges
when about to attend the Court at Westminster or go shopping in London.

[Illustration: THE WATER-GATE OF YORK HOUSE.]

Just beyond York House came Hungerford House, which has given its
name to the railway bridge crossing from the station; and then came
Northumberland House, which was the last of the great historic
riverside palaces to be demolished, being pulled down in comparatively
modern times to make way for Northumberland Avenue. Other famous
palaces are remembered in the names of Durham Street and Scotland Yard.

When in 1529 Wolsey fell from his high estate, Henry VIII., his
unscrupulous master, at once took possession of his palace at
Whitehall, and made it the principal Royal residence. To give it
suitable surroundings he formed (for his own sport and pleasure)
the park which we now call St. James’s Park. When later he
dissolved the monasteries he seized a small hospital, known as St.
James-in-the-Fields, standing on the far side of the estate, and
converted it into a hunting lodge. This afterwards became the famous
Palace of St. James’s.

Of Whitehall Palace all that now remains is the Banqueting Hall (now
used to house the exhibits of the United Service Institution), built
in the reign of James I. by the famous architect Inigo Jones; the rest
perished by fire soon after the revolution of 1688. For some time
afterwards St. James’s Palace was the only Royal residence in London,
but the Sovereigns soon provided themselves with the famous Kensington
and Buckingham Palaces.

[Illustration: THE BANQUETING HALL, WHITEHALL PALACE.]




CHAPTER TEN

_Royal Westminster—The Abbey_


The story of Westminster is nearly as old as that of London itself.

In our first chapter we spoke of the position of London being fixed to
a large extent by the Kent road passing from Dover to the Midlands.
That road, heading from Rochester, originally passed over—and still
passes over—the Darent at Dartford, the Cray at Crayford, the
Ravensbourne at Deptford; and then made its way, not to the crossing
at Billingsgate, but to a still older ford or ferry which existed in
very early days at the spot where Westminster now stands. If you look
at the map of London, you will see that the Edgware Road, passing in a
south-easterly direction from St. Albans, comes down, with but a slight
curve, as if to meet this north-westerly Kent road. That they did so
meet there is but little doubt, and this meeting gave us the Royal City
of Westminster.

[Illustration: THE RIVER AT THORNEY ISLAND.]

In pre-Roman days Lambeth and Westminster, Belgravia and Chelsea, were
simply reedy marshes. Out of them rose a number of gravelly islands
of various sizes, and one of these, larger and more solid than the
rest—Thorney or Bramble Island—became in due course the site of the
city which for centuries was second only to London itself; for though
the building of the Bridge and the rapid growth of the Port meant the
diversion of the Kentish Watling Street to a new route through London,
the Thorney Island settlement grew just as steadily as that of the
bluff lower down the stream, till eventually it held England’s most
celebrated Abbey and Royal Palace, and its Houses of Parliament.

As so often happened in early days, the settlement developed round
a religious house. Probably it originated in a British fortress.
Certainly it comprised a considerable Roman station and market. But all
that lies in the misty past. The legend remains that in the year 604
Sebert, King of the East Saxons, there founded a minster of the west
(St. Peter’s) to rival the minster of the east (St. Paul’s) which was
being erected within the City of London; and indeed we are still shown
in the Abbey the tomb of this traditional founder.

When we come to the reign of Edward the Confessor we begin to get to
actual definite things. Edward, as we know from our history books, was
a very religious man, almost as much a monk as a King; and he took
special delight in rebuilding ruined churches. While he was in exile in
Normandy he made a vow to St. Peter that he would go on pilgrimage to
Rome if ever he came into his kingdom. When, in the passage of time, he
became King, and proposed to carry out his vows, his counsellors would
not hear of such a journey; and, in the end, the Pope of Rome released
him from his vow on condition that he agreed to build an Abbey to the
glory of St. Peter.

This Edward did. His own particular friend, Edwin, presided over the
small monastery of Thorney, so Edward determined to make this the site
of his new Abbey. Pulling down the old place, he devoted a tenth part
of his income to the raising of the new “Collegiate Church of St. Peter
of Westminster.” Commenced in the year 1049, it became the King’s
life-work, and was consecrated only eight days before his death.

In order that he might see the builders at work on his favourite
project, he built himself a palace between the Abbey and the River, and
for fifteen years he watched the rising into being of such an Abbey as
England had never known. He endowed it lavishly with estates, and gave
it the right of sanctuary, whereby all men should be safe within its
walls.

Of course, the fine structure we see as we stand in the open space
known as Broad Sanctuary is not the Confessor’s building. Of that, all
that now remains is the Chapel of the Pyx, the great schoolroom of
Westminster School, which was the old monks’ dormitory, and portions
of the walls of the south cloister. The rest has been added from time
to time by the various Sovereigns. Henry III., in 1245, pulled down
large portions of the old structure, and erected a beautiful chapel
to contain the remains of the Abbey’s founder, and this chapel we can
visit to-day. In it lies the sainted Confessor, borne thither on the
shoulders of the Plantagenet nobles whose humbler tombs surround the
shrine; also his Queen, Eleanor; Edward III., and that Queen who saved
the lives of the burghers of Calais; also the luckless Richard II.

[Illustration: Henry VII.’s Chapel, Westminster Abbey.]

Other Sovereigns also took a share; but it was left to Henry VII. to
give us the body of the Abbey mainly in the shape we know. At enormous
expense he erected the famous Perpendicular chapel, called by his
name—one of the most beautiful and magnificent chapels in the whole
world.

When we stand in the subdued light in this exquisite building, and
examine the beautifully fretted stone-work of its amazing roof—a “dream
in stone,” its “walls wrought into universal ornament,” the richly
carved, dark-oak stalls of the Knights of the Bath with the banners
of their Order drooping overhead—we find it hard to recall that this
miserly man was one of the least popular of England’s Kings.

In this spot lie, in addition to the remains of Henry himself, those of
most of our later Kings and Queens. Here side by side the sisters Mary
and Elizabeth “are at one; the daughter of Catherine of Aragon and the
daughter of Anne Boleyn repose in peace at last.” Here, too, rests that
tragic figure of history, Mary Queen of Scots; and James I., Charles
I., William III., Queen Anne, and George II.

For numbers of us one of the most interesting parts of the Abbey will
always be “Poets’ Corner,” in the south transept. Here rest all that
remains of many of our mightiest wielders of the pen, from Chaucer, the
father of English poetry, down to Tennyson and Browning. Many of the
names on the monuments which cluster so closely together are forgotten
now, just as their works are never read; but the tablets to the memory
of Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, Dryden, Dickens, Tennyson, and Browning,
will always serve to remind us of the mighty dead. The north transept
is devoted largely to the monuments to our great statesmen and our
great warriors.

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY.]

In the Choir we come upon the Coronation Chairs. The Confessor in
building his church had in mind that the Abbey should be the place of
coronation of England’s Sovereigns; and down through the centuries
this custom has been observed. Indeed, certain parts of the regalia
worn by the King or Queen on Coronation Day are actually the identical
articles presented to the Abbey by Edward himself. The old and battered
chair is that of Edward I., the “hammer of the Scots,” who lies buried
with his fellow Plantagenets in the Confessor’s Chapel. Just under
the seat of the chair is the famous “stone of destiny,” brought from
Scone by Edward, to mark the completeness of the defeat. Its removal to
Westminster sorely troubled our northern neighbours, for they believed
that the Supreme Power travelled with that stone. Since those days
every English Sovereign has been crowned in this chair. Its companion
was made for Mary, wife of William III.

In the Nave lies one of the most frequently visited of all the
tombs—the last resting-place of the Unknown Warrior, who, brought over
from France and buried with all the grandeur and solemnity of a Royal
funeral, typifies for us the thousands of brave lads who made the great
sacrifice—who died that we might live.

What most of us forget is that the place which we call Westminster
Abbey was only the Chapel belonging to the Abbey, the place where the
monks worshipped. In addition there was a whole collection of buildings
where the monks ate, slept, studied, worked, etc. Of these most have
been swept away. If we pass out through the door of the South Aisle we
can see the ancient cloisters where the monks washed themselves, took
their exercise and such little recreation as they were allowed, and
where they buried their brothers. There was also the Abbot’s House,
which afterwards became the Deanery, and there was the Chapter House,
a building which fortunately has been preserved to us almost in its
original condition. This was the place where the business of the Abbey
was conducted, where the monks came together each day after Matins in
order that the tasks of the day might be allotted and God’s blessing
asked, where afterwards offenders were tried and penances imposed. Till
the end of the reign of Henry VIII. the House of Commons met in this
chamber when the monks were not using it; and afterwards it was set
aside as an office for the keeping of records. When in 1540 came the
dissolution of the Abbey, the Chapter House became Royal property, and
that is why we now see a policeman in charge of it instead of one of
the Abbey vergers.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

_Royal Westminster—The Houses of Parliament_


When in the eleventh century Edward the Confessor built the palace from
which to survey the erection of his beloved Abbey, he little dreamed
that upon the very spot would meet the Parliament of an Empire greater
even than Rome; nor did he realize that through several centuries
Westminster Palace would be the favourite home of the Kings and Queens
of England.

William Rufus added to the Confessor’s edifice, and also partially
built the walls of the Great Hall, which is the sole thing that
remains of the ancient fabric. Other Kings enlarged the palace from
time to time. Stephen erected the Chapel of St. Stephen, in which met
the Commons from the time of Edward VI. till the year 1834, when a
terrible fire wiped out practically the whole of the ancient Palace of
Westminster.

[Illustration: THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.]

To-day, when we stand on Westminster Bridge or Lambeth Bridge, and
survey the huge building which provides London with one of its greatest
landmarks, we are looking at a new Palace: from the River not a stone
of the old structure is visible. A magnificent Palace it is too! Its
towers, one at each end, rise high into the air, one of them 320 feet
high, the other 20 feet more; and its buildings cover a matter of 8
acres. From Westminster Bridge we see the whole of the river front,
900 feet long, with the famous “terrace” in front, where in summer the
Members of Parliament stroll and take tea with their friends.

Westminster Hall, which fortunately survived the disastrous fire of
1834, is on the side farthest from the River: it runs parallel with the
House of Commons, and projects from the main building just opposite the
end of the Henry VII. Chapel in the Abbey.

If we enter the Parliament buildings we shall very possibly do so by
the famous hall known as St. Stephen’s Hall—built on the site of the
ancient House of Commons. Westminster Hall then lies to our left, as
we enter, down a flight of steps.

Let us descend for a few moments, for the Hall is perhaps the finest
of its kind in all our land. Its vast emptiness silences the words
which rise to our lips: we feel instinctively that this is a place
of wonderful memories. Our eyes travel along the mighty, carved-oak
roof which spans the great width of the building, and we can scarcely
believe that this roof was built so long ago as the time of Richard
II., or even earlier, and that it is still the actual timbers we see in
places.

What stories could these ancient stones beneath our feet tell us,
had they but the power! What tales of joy and what tales of terrible
tragedy! Here were held many of the festivities which followed the
coronation ceremonies in the Abbey. Henry III. here showed to the
citizens his bride, Eleanor of Provence, when “there were assembled
such a multitude of the nobility of both sexes, such numbers of the
religious, and such a variety of stage-players, that the City of
London could scarcely contain them.... Whatever the world pours forth
of pleasure and glory was there specially displayed.” And yet a few
years later saw that same Henry taking part in a vastly different
spectacle—when, in the presence of a gathering equally distinguished,
he was compelled to watch the Archbishop of Canterbury as he threw to
the stone floor of the Hall a lighted torch, with these words: “Thus be
extinguished and stink and smoke in hell all those who dare to violate
the charters of the Kingdom.”

A plate let into the floor tells us that on that spot stood Wentworth,
Earl of Strafford, strong Minister of a weak King, when he was tried
for his life; while upon the stairs which we have descended is another
tablet to mark the spot whence that weak King himself, Charles I.,
heard his death sentence. Here, too, were tried William Wallace, Thomas
More, and Warren Hastings, while just outside in Old Palace Yard the
half-demented Guido Fawkes and the proud, scholarly Sir Walter Raleigh
met their deaths.

Returning to St. Stephen’s Hall, which is lined with the statues
of the great statesmen who were famous in the older chamber, and
passing up another flight of steps, we find ourselves in the octagonal
Central Hall, or, as it is more usually called, the Lobby. Here we are
practically in the middle of the great pile of buildings. To our right,
as we enter, stretches the House of Lords and all the apartments that
pertain to it—the Audience Chamber, the Royal Robing Room, the Peers’
Robing Room, the House of Lords Library—ending in the stately square
tower, known as the Victoria Tower. To our left lies the House of
Commons and all its committee, dining, smoking, reading-rooms, etc.,
ending in the famous “Big Ben” tower. “Big Ben” is, of course, known
to everybody. Countless thousands have heard his 13½ tons of metal
boom out the hour of the day, and have set their watches right by the
14-foot minute-hands of the four clock-faces, which each measure 23
feet across.

The House of Lords itself is a fine building, 90 feet long and 45
feet wide, its walls and ceiling beautifully decorated with paintings
representing famous scenes from our history. At one end is the King’s
gorgeous throne, and beside it, slightly lower, those of the Queen and
the Prince of Wales. Just in front is the famous “Woolsack,” an ugly
red seat, stuffed with wool, as a reminder of the days when wool was
the chief source of the nation’s wealth. On this, when the House is in
session, sits the Lord Chancellor of England, who presides over the
assembly.

The House of Commons is not quite so ornate: here the benches are
upholstered in a quiet green. At the far end is the Speaker’s Chair.
The Speaker, as you probably know, is the chairman of the House of
Commons, the member who has been chosen by his fellows to control the
debates and keep order in the House. In front of the Speaker’s Chair is
a table, at which sit three men in wigs and gowns, the Clerks of the
House. On the table lies the Mace—the heavy staff which is the emblem
of authority.




CHAPTER TWELVE

_The Riverside of To-day_


The Riverside of to-day is noticeable for many things, but for nothing
more so than the very great difference between the two banks. On the
one hand we have a magnificent Embankment sweeping round through almost
the entire length of the River’s passage through London, with large and
important buildings surmounting the thoroughfare; while on the other
hand we have nothing but a huddled collection of commercial buildings,
right on the water’s edge—unimposing, dingy, and dismal, save in the
one spot where the new County Hall breaks the ugly monotony and gives
promise of better things in future for the Surrey shore.

The Embankment on the Middlesex side may perhaps be said to be one of
the outcomes of the Great Fire, for, though its construction was not
undertaken till 1870, it was one of the main improvements suggested
by Sir Christopher Wren in his scheme for the rebuilding of London.
The Victoria Embankment, which sweeps round from Blackfriars to
Westminster, is a mile and a quarter long. Its river face consists of a
great granite wall, 8 feet in thickness, with tunnels inside it for the
carrying of sewers, water-mains, gas-pipes, etc., all of which can be
reached without interfering with that splendid wide road beneath which
the Underground Railway runs. There is a continuation of the Embankment
on the south side from Westminster to Vauxhall, known as the Albert
Embankment, while on the north it runs, with some interruptions, as far
as Chelsea.

One of the most interesting sights of the Embankment is Cleopatra’s
Needle—a tall stone obelisk, which stands by the water’s edge. This
stone, one of the oldest monuments in the world, stood originally
in the ancient city of On, in Egypt, and formed part of an enormous
temple to the sun-god. Later it was shifted with a similar stone to
Alexandria, there to take a place in the Cæsarium—the temple erected in
honour of the Roman Emperors. Centuries passed: the Cæsarium fell into
ruins, and Cleopatra’s obelisk lay forgotten in the sand. Eventually
it was offered to this country by the Khedive of Egypt, but the task
of transporting it was so difficult that nothing was done till 1877-8,
when Sir Erasmus Wilson undertook the enormous cost of the removal. It
has nothing to do with Cleopatra.

Of the bridges over the River we have already dealt with the most
famous—the remarkable old London Bridge which stood for so many
centuries and only came to an end in 1832. Westminster Bridge, built in
1750, was the first rival to the ancient structure, and though it was
but a poor affair it made the City Council very dissatisfied with their
possession. Nor was this surprising, for the old bridge had got into a
very bad state, so that in 1756 the City Fathers decided to demolish
all the buildings on the bridge, and to make a parapet and proper
footwalks.

Up to the time of King George II. there was at Westminster merely a
jetty or landing-stage used in connection with the ferry that was used
in place of the ancient ford; but during this King’s reign Westminster,
and, shortly afterwards, Blackfriars Bridge, came into being. Battersea
and Vauxhall, Waterloo (built two years after the battle), Southwark,
Chelsea, and Lambeth followed in fairly rapid succession. Of these,
Westminster, Blackfriars, Battersea, Vauxhall, and Southwark have
already been rebuilt.

Old Vauxhall Bridge was the first cast-iron bridge ever built;
Wandsworth was the first lattice bridge; Waterloo Bridge the first ever
made with a perfectly level roadway. Hungerford Bridge, which stretched
where now that atrociously ugly iron structure, the Charing Cross
Railway bridge, defiles the River, was originally designed by Brunel,
the eminent engineer, to span the gorge over the Avon at Clifton,
but it was eventually placed in position across the Thames. When the
atrocity was built the suspension bridge was taken back to Clifton,
where it now hangs like a spider’s web over the mighty gap in the hills.

[Illustration: ST. PAUL’S FROM THE SOUTH END OF SOUTHWARK BRIDGE.]

Until the close of the nineteenth century London Bridge enjoyed the
distinction of being the lowest bridge on the River’s course; but in
1894 the wonderful Tower Bridge was opened. This mighty structure,
which was commenced in 1886, cost no less than £830,000. In its
construction 235,000 cubic feet of granite and other stone, 20,000 tons
of cement, 10,000 yards of concrete, 31,000,000 bricks, and 14,000 tons
of steel were used. In its centre are two bascules, each weighing 1,200
tons, which swing upwards to allow big ships to pass into the Pool.
Although these enormous bascules, the largest in the world, weigh so
much, they work by hydraulic force as smoothly and easily as a door
opens and shuts.

Of the buildings on the south side of the River practically none
are worthy of notice save the Shot Tower—where lead-shot is made by
dropping the molten metal from the top of the shaft—the new County
Hall, and St. Thomas’s Hospital at Westminster. The County Hall is a
splendid structure, one of the finest of its kind in the whole world.
It possesses miles of corridors, hundreds of rooms, and what is more,
a magnificent water frontage. The architect is Mr. Ralph Knott. St.
Thomas’s Hospital, which stands close to it, is one of a number of
excellent hospitals in various parts of London. When in 1539 the
monasteries were closed, London was left without anything in the way
of hospitals, or alms-houses, or schools; for the care of the sick,
the infirm, and the young had always been the work of the monks and
the nuns. In consequence, London suffered terribly. Matters became so
extremely serious that the City Fathers approached the King with a
view to the return of some of these institutions. Their petition was
granted, and King Henry gave back St. Bartholomew’s, Christ’s Hospital,
and the Bethlehem Hospital. Later King Edward VI. allowed the people
to purchase St. Thomas’s Hospital—the hospital of the old Abbey of
Bermondsey. When in 1871 the South-Eastern Railway Company purchased
the ground on which the old structure stood, a new and more convenient
building was erected on the Albert Embankment opposite the Houses of
Parliament.

As we stand once more on Westminster Bridge and see the two great
places, one on each side, where our lawmakers sit—those of the Nation
and those of the great City—our glance falls on the dirty water of
old Father Thames slipping by; and we think to ourselves that great
statesmen may spring to fame and then die and leave England the poorer,
governments good and bad may rise and fall, changes of all sorts may
happen within these two stately buildings, the very stones may crumble
to dust, but still the River flows on—silent, irresistible.




BOOK III

THE UPPER RIVER


[Illustration: THE CASTLE KEEP, OXFORD.]




THE UPPER RIVER




CHAPTER ONE

_Stripling Thames_


Just where the Thames starts has always been a matter of argument, for
several places have laid claim to the honour of holding the source of
this great national possession.

About three miles south-west of Cirencester, and quite close to that
ancient and famous highway the Ackman Street (or Bath fosseway),
there is a meadow known as Trewsbury Mead, lying in a low part of the
western Cotswolds, just where Wiltshire and Gloucestershire meet; and
in this is situated what is commonly known as “Thames Head”—a spring
which in winter bubbles forth from a hollow, but which in summer is so
completely dried by the action of the Thames Head Pump, which drains
the water from this and all other springs in the neighbourhood, that
the cradle of the infant Thames is usually bone-dry for a couple of
miles or more of its course. This spot is usually recognized as the
beginning of the River.

[Illustration: THAMES HEAD.]

If, however, we consider that the source of a river is the point at
greatest distance from the mouth we shall have to look elsewhere;
for the famous “Seven Streams” at the foot of Leckhampton Hill, from
which comes the brook later known as the River Churn, can claim the
distinction of being a few more miles from the North Sea; and this
distinction has frequently been recognized as sufficient to grant the
claim to be the true commencement.

But the Churn has always been the Churn (indeed, the Romans named the
neighbouring settlement from the stream—Churn-chester or Cirencester);
and no one has ever thought of calling it the Thames. Whereas the
stream beginning in Trewsbury Mead has from time immemorial been known
as the Thames (Isis is only an alternative name, not greatly used in
early days); and so the verdict of history seems to be on its side,
whatever geography may have to say.

Nevertheless it matters little which can most successfully support
its claim. What does matter is that Churn, and Isis, and Leach, and
Ray, and Windrush, and the various other feeders, give of their waters
in sufficient quantity to ensure a considerable river later on. From
the point of view of their usefulness both the main stream and the
tributaries are negligible till we come to Lechlade, for only there
does navigation and consequently trade begin. But if the stream is not
very useful, it is exceedingly pretty, with quaint rustic bridges
spanning its narrow channel, and fine old-world mills and mansions and
cottages and numbers of ancient churches on its banks.

[Illustration:

Lechlade from the First Lock.]

The first place of any size is the little town of Cricklade, which can
even boast of two churches. Here the little brooks of infant Thames
(or Isis) and Churn join forces, and yield quite a flowing stream. At
Lechlade the rivulet is joined by the Colne, and its real life as a
river commences. From now on to London there is a towing-path beside
the river practically the whole of the way, for navigation by barges
thus early becomes possible.

From Lechlade onwards to Old Windsor, a matter of about a hundred
miles, the upper Thames has on its right bank the county of Berkshire,
with its beautiful Vale of the White Horse, remembered, of course,
by all readers of “Tom Brown’s Schooldays.” On the left bank is
Oxfordshire as far as Henley, and Buckinghamshire afterwards.

In and out the “stripling Thames” winds its way, clear as crystal as
it slips past green meadows and little copses. There is very little to
note as we pass between Lechlade and Oxford, a matter of forty miles or
so. Owing to the clay bed, not a town of any sort finds a place on or
near the banks. Such villages as there are stand few and far between.

Just past Lechlade there is Kelmscott, where William Morris dwelt for
some time in the Manor House; and the village will always be famous
for that. There in the old-world place he wrote the fine poems and
tales which later he printed in some of the most beautiful books ever
made, and there he thought out his beautiful designs for wall-papers,
carpets, curtains, etc. He was a wonderful man, was William Morris, a
day-dreamer who was not content with his dreams until they had taken
actual shape.

[Illustration: KELMSCOTT MANOR.]

On we go past New Bridge, which is one of the oldest, if not the very
oldest, of the many bridges which cross the River. Close at hand the
Windrush joins forces, and the River swells and grows wider as it
sweeps off to the north. Away on the hill on the Berkshire side is
a little village known as Cumnor, which is not of any importance in
itself, but which is interesting because there once stood the famous
Cumnor Hall, where the beautiful Amy Robsart met with her untimely
death, as possibly some of you have read in Sir Walter Scott’s novel
“Kenilworth.” Receiving the Evenlode, the River bends south again,
and a little later we pass Godstow Lock, not far from which are the
ruins of Godstow Nunnery, where Fair Rosamund lived and was afterwards
buried. Between Godstow and Oxford is a huge, flat piece of meadowland,
known as Port Meadow: this during the War formed one of our most
important flying-grounds.

Henceforward the upper Thames is interrupted at fairly frequent
intervals by those man-made contrivances known as _locks_—ingenious
affairs which in recent years have taken the place of or rather
supplemented the old-fashioned weirs. For any river which boasts of
serious water traffic the chief difficulty, especially in summer-time,
has always been that of holding back sufficient water to enable the
boats to keep afloat. Naturally with a sloping bed the water runs
rapidly seawards, and if the supply is not plentiful the river soon
tends to become shallow or even dry. In very early days man noticed
this, and, copying the beaver, he erected dams or weirs to hold
back the water, and keep it at a reasonable depth. And down through
the centuries until comparatively recent years these dams or weirs
sufficed. As man progressed he fashioned his weirs with a number of
“paddles” which lifted up and down to allow a boat to pass through.
When the craft was moving downstream just one or two paddles were
raised, and the boat shot through the narrow opening on the crest of
the rapids thus formed; but when the boat was making its way upstream
more paddles were raised so that the rush of water was not so great,
and the boat was with difficulty hauled through the opening in face of
the strong current. This very picturesque but primitive method lasted
until comparatively recent years. Now the old paddle-locks have gone
the way of all ancient and delightful things, and in their places we
have the thoroughly effective “pound-locks”—affairs with double gates
and a pool or dock in between—which in reality convert the river into
a long series of water-terraces or steps, dropping lower and lower the
nearer we approach the mouth.




CHAPTER TWO

_Oxford_


One hundred and twelve miles above London Bridge there is the second
most celebrated city on the banks of the Thames—Oxford, the “city of
spires,” as it has been called. By no means a big place, it is famous
as the home of our oldest University.

Seen from a distance, Oxford is a place of great beauty, especially
when the meadows round about are flooded. Then it seems to rise from
the water like some English Venice. Nor does the beauty grow less as
we approach closer, or when we view the city from some other point.
Always we see the delicate spires of the Cathedral and the churches,
the beautiful towers of the various colleges, the great dome of the
Radcliffe Camera, all of them nestling among glorious gardens and fine
old trees.

The question at once comes into our minds, Why is it that there is a
famous city here? Why should such a place as this, right out in the
country, away from what might be called the main arteries of the life
of England, be one of the most important seats of learning?

To understand this we must go back a long way, and we must ask
ourselves the question, Why was there ever anything—even a village—here
at all? If we think a little we shall see that in the early days, when
there were not very many good roads, and when there were still fewer
bridges, the most important spots along a river were the places where
people could cross: that is to say, the fords. To these spots came
the merchants with their waggons and their trains of pack-horses, the
generals with their armies, the drovers with their cattle, the pilgrims
with their staves. All and sundry, journeying from place to place, made
for the fords, while the long stretches of river bank between these
places were never visited and seldom heard of.

Now, what made a ford? Shallow water, you say. Yes, that is true. But
shallow water was not enough. It was necessary besides that the bed of
the stream should be firm and hard, so that those who wished might
find a safe crossing. And places where such a bottom could be found
were few and far between along the course of the Thames. Practically
everywhere it was soft clay in which the feet of the men and the
animals and the wheels of the waggons sank deep if they tried to get
from bank to bank.

But, just at the point where the Thames bends southwards, just before
the Cherwell flows into it, there is a stretch of gravel which in years
gone by made an excellent ford and provided a suitable spot on which
some sort of a settlement might grow.

How old that settlement is no one knows. Legend tells us that a Mercian
saint by the name of Frideswide, together with a dozen companions,
founded a nunnery here somewhere about the year 700. Certainly the
village is mentioned under the name of Oxenford (that is, the ford of
the oxen) in the Saxon Chronicle, a book of ancient history written
about a thousand years ago; and we know that Edward the Elder took
possession of it, and, building a castle and walls, made a royal
residence. So that it is a place of great antiquity.

Another question that comes into our minds is this, When did Oxford
become the great home of learning which it has so long been? Here
again the truth is difficult to ascertain. Legend tells us that King
Alfred founded the schools, but that is rather more than doubtful. We
do know that during the twelfth century there was a great growth in
learning. Right throughout Europe great schools sprang into existence,
one of the most important being that in Paris. Thither went numbers of
Englishmen to learn, and they, returning to their own land, founded
schools in different parts, usually in connection with the monasteries
and the cathedrals. Such a school was one which grew into being at St.
Frideswide’s monastery at Oxford. Also King Henry I. (Beauclerc—the
fine scholar—as he was called) built a palace at Oxford, and there he
gathered together many learned men, and from that time people gradually
began to flock to Oxford for education. They tramped weary miles
through the forest, across the hills and dales, and so came to the
little town, only to find it crowded out with countless others as poor
as themselves; but they were not disheartened. There being no proper
places for teaching, they gathered with their masters, also equally
poor, wherever they could find a quiet spot, in a porch, or a loft, or
a stable; and so the torch was handed on. Gradually lecture-rooms, or
schools as they were called, and lodging-houses or halls, were built,
and life became more bearable. Then in 1229 came an accident which yet
further established Oxford in its position. This accident took the form
of a riot in the streets of Paris, during the course of which several
scholars of Paris University were killed by the city archers. Serious
trouble between the University folk and the Provost of Paris came of
this; and, in the end, there was a very great migration of students
from Paris to Oxford; and, a few years after, England could boast of
Oxford as a famous centre of learning.

But it was not till the reign of Henry III. that a real college, as we
understand it, came into being. Then, in the year 1264, one Walter
de Merton gathered together in one house a number of students, and
there they lived and were taught; and thus Merton, the oldest of the
colleges, began. Others soon followed—Balliol, watched over by the
royal Dervorguilla; University College, founded by William of Durham,
who was one to come over after the Paris town and gown quarrel; New
College; and so on, college after college, until now, as we wander
about the streets of this charming old city, it seems almost as if
every other building is a college. And magnificent buildings they
are too, with their glorious towers and gateways, their beautiful
stained-glass windows, their panelled walls. To wander round the city
of Oxford is to step back seemingly into a forgotten age, so worn and
ancient-looking are these piles of masonry. Modern clothes seem utterly
out of place in such an antique spot.

[Illustration:

MAGDALEN TOWER _from the_ BRIDGE.]

Different folk, of course, will regard different colleges as holding
pride of place; but, I am sure, all will agree that one of the finest
is Magdalen College, a beautiful building standing amid cool, green
meadows. Very fine indeed is the great tower, built in 1492, from the
top of which every May morning the College choir sings a glad hymn of
praise; and very fine too are the cloisters below, and the lovely leafy
walks in whose shade many famous men have walked in their youthful days.

If we grant to Magdalen its claim to be the most beautiful of the
colleges, we must undoubtedly recognize Christ Church as the most
magnificent. We shall see something of the splendour of Cardinal
Wolsey’s ideas with regard to building when we talk about his palace
at Hampton Court, and we need feel no surprise at the grandeur of
Christ Church. Unfortunately, Wolsey’s ideas were never carried out:
his fall from favour put an end to the work when but three sides of the
Great Quadrangle had been completed; and then for just on a century
the fabric stood in its unfinished state—a monument to o’erleaping
ambition. Nevertheless it was completed, and though it is not all that
Wolsey intended it to be, it is still one of the glories of the city.
Built round about the old Cathedral, it stands upon the site of the
ancient St. Frideswide’s priory.

The famous “Tom Tower” which stands in the centre of the front of the
building was not a part of the original idea: it was added in 1682
by Dr. Fell, according to the design of Sir Christopher Wren, the
architect of St. Paul’s Cathedral. “Tom Tower” is so called because of
its great bell, brought from Osney Abbey. “Great Tom,” which weighs no
less than six tons, peals forth each night at nine o’clock a hundred
and one strokes, and by the time of the last stroke all the College
gates are supposed to be shut and all the undergraduates safely within
the College buildings.

The most wonderful possession of Christ Church is its glorious “Early
English” hall, in which the members of the College dine daily: 115 feet
long, 40 feet broad, and 50 feet high, it is unrivalled in all England,
with perhaps the exception of Westminster Hall. Here at the tables have
sat many of England’s most famous men—courtiers, writers, politicians,
soldiers, artists—and the portraits of a number of them, painted by
famous painters, look down from the ancient walls.

But these are only two of the colleges. At every turn some other
architectural beauty, some dream in stone, discloses itself, for the
colleges are dotted about all over the centre of the town, and at every
other corner there is some spot of great interest. To describe them all
briefly would more than fill the pages of this book.

Nor are colleges the only delightful buildings in this city of
beautiful places. There is the famous Sheldonian Theatre, built from
Wren’s plans: this follows the model of an ancient Roman theatre,
and will seat four thousand people. There is the celebrated Bodleian
Library, founded as early as 1602, and containing a rich collection of
rare Eastern and Greek and Latin books and manuscripts. The Bodleian,
like the British Museum, has the right to call for a copy of every book
published in the United Kingdom.

But Oxford has known a life other than that of a university town:
it has been in its time a military centre of some importance. As we
sweep round northwards in the train from London, just before we enter
the city, the great square tower of the Castle stands out, one of the
most prominent objects in the town. And it is really one of the most
interesting too, though few find time to visit it. So absorbed are most
folk in the churches and chapels, the libraries and college halls, with
their exquisite carvings and ornamentations and their lovely gardens,
that they forget this frowning relic of the Conqueror’s day—the most
lasting monument of the city. Built in 1071 by Robert d’Oilly, boon
companion of the Conqueror, it has stood the test of time through all
these centuries. Like Windsor, that other Norman stronghold, it has
seen little enough of actual fighting: in Oxford the pen has nearly
always been mightier than the sword.

One brief episode of war it had when Stephen shut up his cousin, the
Empress Maud, within its walls in the autumn of 1142. Then Oxford
tasted siege if not assault, and the castle was locked up for three
months. However, the River and the weather contrived to save Maud,
for, just as provisions were giving out and surrender was only a
matter of days, there came a severe frost and the waters were thickly
covered. Then it was that the Empress with but two or three white-clad
attendants escaped across the ice and made her way to Wallingford,
while her opponents closely guarded the roads and bridges.

Nor in our consideration of the glories of this beloved old city must
we forget the River—for no one in the place forgets it. Perhaps we
should not speak of _the_ River, for Oxford is the fortunate possessor
of two, standing as it does in the fork created by the flowing together
of the Thames and the Cherwell. The Thames, as we have already
seen, flows thither from the west, while the Cherwell makes its way
southwards from Edgehill; and, though we are accustomed to think of
the Thames as the main stream, the geologists, whose business it is to
make a close study of the earth’s surface, tell us that the Cherwell
is in reality the more important of the two; that down its valley in
the far-away past flowed a great river which with the Kennet was the
ancestor of the present-day River; that the tributary Thames has grown
so much that it has been able to capture and take over as its own
the valley of the Cherwell from Oxford onwards to Reading. But that,
of course, is a story of the very dim past, long before the days of
history.

The Cherwell is a very pretty little stream, shaded by overhanging
willows and other trees, so that it is usually the haunt of pleasure,
the place where the undergraduate takes his own or somebody else’s
sister for an afternoon’s excursion, or where he makes his craft fast
in the shade in order that he may enjoy an afternoon’s quiet reading.
A walk through the meadows on its banks is, indeed, something very
pleasant, with the stream on one side of us and that most beautiful of
colleges, Magdalen, on the other. Here as we proceed down the famous
avenue of pollard willows, winding between two branches of the stream,
we can hear almost continuously the singing of innumerable birds, for
the Oxford gardens and meadows form a veritable sanctuary in which live
feathered friends of every sort.

But the Thames (or Isis as it is invariably called in Oxford) is the
place of more serious matters. To the rowing man “the River” means
only one thing, and really only a very short space of that: he is
accustomed to speak of “the River” and “the Cher,” and with him the
latter does not count at all. Everybody in the valley, certainly every
boy and girl, knows about the Oxford and Cambridge Boatrace, which is
held annually on the Thames at Putney, when two selected crews from the
rival universities race each other over a distance. Probably quite a
few of us have witnessed the exciting event. Well, “Boatrace Day” is
merely the final act of a long drama, nearly all the scenes of which
take place, not at Putney, but on the river at the University town.
For the Varsity “eight” are only chosen from the various college crews
after long months of arduous preparation. Each of the colleges has its
own rowing club, and the college crews race against each other in the
summer term. A fine sight it is, too, to see the long thin “eights”
passing at a great pace in front of the beautifully decorated “Barges,”
which are to the college rowing clubs what pavilions are to the cricket
clubs.

These “barges,” which stretch along the river front for some
considerable distance, resemble nothing so much as the magnificent
houseboats which we see lower down the river at Henley, Maidenhead,
Molesey, etc. They are fitted up inside with bathrooms and
dressing-rooms, and comfortable lounges and reading-rooms, while their
flat tops are utilised by the rowing men for sitting at ease and
chatting to their friends. Each college has its own “barge,” and it is
a point of honour to make it and keep it a credit to the college. The
long string of “barges” form a very beautiful picture, particularly
when the river is quiet, and the finely decorated vessels with their
background of green trees are reflected in the smooth waters.

May is the great time for the River at Oxford, for then are held the
races of the senior “crews” or “eights.” Then for a week the place,
both shore and stream, is gay with pretty dresses and merry laughter,
for mothers and sisters, cousins and friends, flock to Oxford in their
hundreds to see the fun. But to the rowing man it is a time of hard
work—with more in prospect if he is lucky; for, just as the “eights” of
this week have been selected from the crews of the February “torpids”
or junior races, so from those doing well during “eights week” may be
chosen the University crew—the “blues.”

Many have been the voices which have sung the praises of the “city of
spires,” for many have loved her. None more so perhaps than Matthew
Arnold, whose poem “The Scholar Gypsy”—the tale of a University lad
who was by poverty forced to leave his studies and join himself to a
company of vagabond gipsies, from whom he gained a knowledge beyond
that of the scholars—is so well known. Says Arnold of the city: “And
yet as she lies, spreading her gardens to the moonlight, and whispering
from her towers the last enchantments of the Middle Ages, who will
deny that Oxford, by her ineffable charm, keeps ever calling us nearer
to the true goal of all of us, to the ideal, to perfection—to beauty,
in a word?”

There are many interesting places within walking distance of Oxford,
but perhaps few more delightful to the eye than old Iffley Church. This
ancient building with its fine old Norman tower is a landmark of the
countryside and well deserves the attention given to it.




CHAPTER THREE

_Abingdon, Wallingford, and the Goring Gap_


Between Oxford and Reading lies a land of shadows—a district dotted
with towns which have shrunk to a mere vestige of their former
greatness. To mention three names only—Abingdon, Dorchester, and
Wallingford—is to conjure up a picture of departed glory.

[Illustration: ABINGDON.]

At Abingdon, centuries ago, was one of those great abbeys which
stretched in a chain eastwards, and helped to ensure the prosperity
of the valley; and the town sprang up and prospered, as was so often
the case, under the shadow of the great ecclesiastical foundation.
Unfortunately the monks and the citizens were constantly at
loggerheads. The wealthy dwellers in the abbey, where the Conqueror’s
own son, Henry Beauclerc, had been educated, and where the greatest
in the land were wont to come, did not approve of tradesmen and
other common folk congregating so near the sacred edifice. Thus in
1327 the proud mitred Abbot refused to allow the citizens to hold a
market in the town, and a riot ensued, in which the folk of Abingdon
were backed up by the Mayor of Oxford and a considerable crowd of the
University students. A great part of the Abbey was burned down, many
of its records were destroyed, and the monks were driven out. But
the tradesmen’s triumph was short-lived, for the Abbot returned with
powerful support, and certain of the ringleaders were hanged for their
share in the disturbance.

However, the town grew despite the frowns of the Church, and it soon
became a considerable centre for the cloth trade. Not only did it
make cloth itself, but much of the traffic which there was between
London and the western cloth-towns—Gloucester, Stroud, Cirencester,
etc.—passed through Abingdon, particularly when its bridge had been
built by John Huchyns and Geoffrey Barbur in 1416.

When, in 1538, the abbey was suppressed, the townsfolk rejoiced at
the downfall of the rich and arrogant monks, and sought pleasure and
revenge in the destruction of the former home of their enemies. So that
in these days there is not a great deal remaining of the ancient fabric.

A few miles below Abingdon is Dorchester (not to be confused with the
Dorset town of the same name), not exactly on the River, but about a
mile up the tributary river, the Thame, which here comes wandering
through the meadows to join the main stream. Like Abingdon, Dorchester
has had its day, but its abbey church remains, built on the site of the
ancient and extremely important Saxon cathedral; and, one must confess,
it seems strangely out of place in such a sleepy little village.

Wallingford, even more than these, has lost its ancient prestige,
for it was through several centuries a great stronghold and a royal
residence. We have only to look at the map of the Thames Valley, and
note how the various roads converge on this particularly useful ford,
to see immediately Wallingford’s importance from a military and a
commercial point of view. A powerful castle to guard such a valuable
key to the midlands, or the south-west, was inevitable.

William the Conqueror, passing that way in order that he might discover
a suitable crossing, and so get round to the north of London (p. 143),
was shown the ford by one Wygod, the ruling thane of the district; and
naturally William realized at once the possibilities of the place. A
powerful castle soon arose in place of the old earthworks, and this
castle lasted on till the Civil War, figuring frequently in the many
struggles that occurred during the next three or four hundred years.

It played an important part in that prolonged and bitter struggle
between Stephen and the Empress Maud, and suffered a very long siege.
Again, in 1646, at the time of the Civil War, it was beset for
sixty-five days by the Parliamentary armies; and, after a gallant stand
by the Royalist garrison, was practically destroyed by Fairfax, who saw
fit to blow it up. So that now very little stands: just a few crumbling
walls and one window incorporated in the fabric of a private residence.

Between Wallingford and Reading lies what is, from the geographical
point of view, one of the most interesting places in the whole length
of the Thames Valley—Goring Gap.

You will see from a contour map that the Thames Basin, generally
speaking, is a hill-encircled valley with gently undulating ground,
except in the one place where the Marlborough-Chiltern range of chalk
hills sweep right across the valley.

By the time the River reaches Goring Gap it has fallen from a height
of about six hundred feet above sea-level to a height of about one
hundred feet above sea-level; and there rises from the river on each
side a steep slope four or five hundred feet high—Streatley Hill on the
Berkshire side and Goring Heath on the Oxfordshire side.

The question arises, Why should these two ranges of hills, the
Marlborough Downs and the Chiltern Hills, meet just at this point? Is
it simply an accident of geography that their two ends stand exactly
face to face on opposite sides of the Thames?

Now the geologists tell us that it is no coincidence. They have studied
the strata—that is, the different layers of the materials forming the
hills—and they find that the strata of the range on the Berkshire side
compare exactly with the strata of the other; so that at some remote
period the two must have been joined to form one unbroken range. How
then did the gap come? Was it due to a cracking of the hill—a double
crack with the earth slipping down in between, as has sometimes
happened in the past? Here again the geologists tells us, No. Moreover
they tell us that undoubtedly the River has _cut its way_ right through
the chalk hills.

“But how can that be possible?” someone says. “Here we have the Thames
down in a low-lying plain on the north-west side of the hills, and
down in the valley on the south-east side. How could a river flowing
across a plain get up to the heights to commence the wearing away at
the tops?” Here again the geologists must come to our aid. They tell us
that back in that dim past, so interesting to picture yet so difficult
to grasp, when the ancient, mighty River flowed (see Book I., Intro.),
the chalk-lands extended from the Chilterns westwards, that there was
no valley where now Oxford, Abingdon, and Lechlade lie, but that the
River flowed across the top of a tableland of chalk from its sources
in the higher grounds of the west to the brink at or near the eastern
slope of the Chilterns; and that from this lofty position the River
was able to wear its way down, and so make a =V=-shaped cutting in
the end of the tableland. Afterwards there came an alteration in the
surface. Some tremendous internal movement caused the land gradually
to fold up, as it were; so that the tableland sagged down in the
middle, leaving the Marlborough-Chiltern hills on the one side and
the Cotswold-Edgehill range on the other, with the Oxford valley in
between. But by this time the =V=-shaped gap had been cut sufficiently
low to allow the River to flow through the hills, and to go on cutting
its way still lower and lower.




CHAPTER FOUR

_Reading_


Reading is without doubt the most disappointing town in the whole of
the Thames Valley. It has had such a full share of history, far more
than other equally famous towns; has been favoured by the reigning
monarch of the land through many centuries; has taken sides in internal
strife and felt the tide of war surging round its gates; it has counted
for so much in the life of England that one feels almost a sense of
loss in finding it just a commonplace manufacturing town, with not a
semblance of any of its former glory.

Like many other towns in England, it sprang up round a religious
house—one of the string of important abbeys which stretched from
Abingdon to Westminster. But before that it had been recognized as an
important position.

We have seen that Oxford, Wallingford, and other places came into
existence by reason of their important fords across the River. Reading
arose into being because the long and narrow peninsula formed by the
junction of the Kennet with the Thames was such a splendid spot for
defensive purposes that right from early days there had been some sort
of a stronghold there.

Here in this very safe place, then, the Conqueror’s son established his
great foundation, the Cluniac Abbey of Reading, for the support of two
hundred monks and for the refreshment of travellers. It was granted
ample revenues, and given many valuable privileges, among them that
of coining money. Its Abbot was a mitred Abbot, and had the right to
sit with the lords spiritual in Parliament. From its very foundation
it prospered, rising rapidly into a position of eminence; and, like
the other abbeys, it did much towards the growth of the agricultural
prosperity of the valley, encouraging the countryfolk to drain and
cultivate their lands properly.

[Illustration:

The Gatehouse Reading Abbey]

Though we first hear of it as a fortified place, and though at
different times in history it felt the shock of war, Reading was never
an important military centre, for the simple reason that it did
not guard a main road across or beside the River. Consequently the
interruptions in its steady progress were few and far between, and the
place was left to develop its civilian and religious strength. This
it did so well that during the four hundred years of the life of the
Abbey it always counted for much with the Sovereigns, who went there
to be entertained, and even in time of pestilence brought thither
their parliaments, whose bodies were in the end buried there. By the
thirteenth century the Abbey had risen to such a position that only
Westminster could vie with it in wealth and magnificence.

And now what remains of it all? Almost nothing. There is what is
called the old Abbey gateway, but it is merely a reconstruction with
some of the ancient materials. In the Forbury Gardens lie all that
is left, just one or two ivy-grown fragments of massive masonry,
outlining perhaps the Chapter House, in which the parliaments were
held, and the great Abbey Church, dedicated to St. Thomas Becket, where
were the royal tombs and where in 1339 John of Gaunt was married.
For the rest, the ruins have served all and sundry as a quarry for
ready-prepared building stone during several centuries. Much of it was
used to make St. Mary’s Church and the Hospital of the Poor Knights of
Windsor; while still more was commandeered by General Conway for the
construction of the bridge between Henley and Wargrave.

How did the Abbey come to such a state of dilapidation? Largely as
a result of the Civil War. The Abbey was dissolved in 1539, and the
Abbot actually hung, drawn, and quartered, because of his defiance. The
royal tombs, where were buried Henry I., the Empress Maud, and others,
were destroyed and the bones scattered; and from that time onwards
things went from bad to worse. Henry VII. converted parts of it into
a palace for himself and used it for a time, but in Elizabethan days
it had got into such a very bad state that the Queen, who stayed there
half-a-dozen times, gave permission for the rotting timbers and many
cartloads of stone to be removed. But it remained a dwelling till the
eventual destruction during the Rebellion.

During the war which proved so disastrous for the great Abbey, Reading
was decidedly Royalist, but the fortunes of war brought several changes
for it. It withstood for some time during 1643 a severe siege by the
Earl of Essex, and, just as relief was at hand, it surrendered. Then
Royalists and Parliamentarians in turn held the town; and naturally
with these changes and the fighting involved the place suffered
greatly, especially the outstanding building, the Abbey. St. Giles’
Church, which escaped destruction, still bears the marks of the
bombardment.

But the town refused to die with the Abbey. The Abbey had done much
to establish and vitalize the town. In its encouragement of the
agriculture of the districts it had created the necessity for a central
market-town, and Reading had grown and flourished accordingly. Thus,
when the Abbey came to an end, the town was so firmly established that
it was enabled to live on and prosper exceedingly.

Now Reading passes its days independent, almost unconscious, of the
past, with its glory and its tragedy. Nor does the River any more
enter into its calculations. To Reading has come the railway; and the
railway has made the modern town what it is—an increasingly important
manufacturing town and railway junction, and a ready centre for the
rich agricultural land round about it; a hive of industry, with
foundries, workshops, big commercial buildings, and a University
College; with churches, chapels, picture-palaces, and fast-moving
electric-tramcars, clanging their way along streets thronged with busy,
hurrying people—in short, a typical, clean, modern industrial town,
with nothing very attractive about it, but on the other hand nothing to
repel or disgust.

Reading’s most famous industries are biscuit-making and seed-growing.
Messrs. Huntley and Palmer’s biscuits, in the making of which four or
five thousand people are employed, are known the world over; and so
are Messrs. Sutton’s seeds, grown in, and advertised by, many acres of
beautiful gardens.

The Kennet, on which the town really stands, is a river which has lost
its ancient power, for the geologists tell us that along its valley the
real mighty river once ran, receiving the considerable Cherwell-Thames
tributary at this point. Now, whereas the tributary has grown in
importance if not in size, the main stream has shrunk to such an
enormous extent that the tributary has become the river, and the river
the tributary. Of course, passing through Reading the little river
loses its beauty, but the Kennet which comes down from the western end
of the Marlborough Downs and flows through the Berkshire meadows is a
delightful little stream.




CHAPTER FIVE

_Holiday Thames—Henley to Maidenhead_


The western half of that portion of the River which has for its bank
the county of Buckinghamshire might well be spoken of as “holiday
Thames,” for it is on this lovely stretch that a great part of the more
important river pleasure-making is done. Certainly we get boating at
Richmond, Kingston, Molesey, etc., nearer the metropolis, but it is of
the Saturday or Sunday afternoon sort, where Londoners, weary from the
week’s labours, find rest and solace in a few brief hours of leisurely
punting or rowing. But, between Maidenhead and Henley, at places like
Sonning, Pangbourne, and Cookham, folk live on or by the River, either
in houseboats or waterside cottages, and the River is not just a
diversion, but is for the time being the all-important thing.

[Illustration: SONNING.]

Nor is this difficult to understand, for the River here is
extraordinarily beautiful—a place to linger in and dream away the
hours. Henley, which commences the stretch, lies just within the
borders of Oxfordshire, and here is celebrated what is, next to the
Boatrace at Putney, the most famous of all Thames festivals—for Henley
Regatta draws rowing men (and women) from all parts, and crews come
from both the Old World and the New to compete in the open races. The
River then is almost covered with craft of all sorts moored closely
together, with just a narrow water-lane down the centre for the passage
of the competing boats; and the bright dresses and gay parasols of the
ladies, with the background of green trees, all reflected in the water,
make a brilliant and pleasing spectacle.

[Illustration: HENLEY.]

A few miles below Henley is Great Marlow, a clean and compact little
riverside town, whose chief interest lies, perhaps, in the fact that
here the poet Shelley lived for a time, writing some of his wonderful
poems. Shelley spent much of his time on the River, and learned to love
it very much, so that in after years we find him writing from Italy:
“My thoughts for ever cling to Windsor Forest and the copses of Marlow.”

The seven miles between Marlow and Maidenhead contain the most glorious
scenery in the whole valley, for the River here for a considerable
distance flows between gently rising hills whose slopes are richly
wooded, the trees in many places coming right down to the water’s
edge. Alike in spring, when the fresh young green is spreading over
the hillsides, and in autumn, when the woods are afire with every
tint of gold and brown, the Cliveden Woods and the Quarry Woods of
Marlow, with their mirrored reflections in the placid waters below,
are indescribably beautiful. Above the woods, high on the Buckingham
bank, stands Cliveden House, magnificently situated. In the old mansion
which formerly stood on the spot was first performed Thomson’s masque
“Alfred.” This is very interesting, for the masque contained “Rule,
Britannia,” composed by Dr. Arne; so here the tune was sung in public
for the first time.

At various spots along the stretch we can see quite clearly the
terraces which indicate the alteration in the position of the
river-bed. High up towards the tops, sometimes actually at the tops of
the hillsides, are the shallow, widespread gravel beds which show where
in the dim past the original great Thames flowed (see Book I., Intro.).
Then lower down come other terraces, with more gravel beds, to show a
second position of the River, when, after centuries, it had cut its way
lower and diminished in volume. Thus:

[Illustration: DIAGRAM OF THE THAMES VALLEY TERRACES.]

Well-marked terraces can be found on the Berkshire side of the River
between Maidenhead and Cookham, also at Remenham not far from Henley.
They are visible on both sides of the River at Reading. Above Reading
similar terraces, with their beds of river gravel, may be seen at
Culham and Cholsey, between Radley and Abingdon, and also at Oxford.




CHAPTER SIX

_Windsor_


Windsor Castle, seen from the River at Clewer as we make our way
downstream, provides us with one of the most magnificent views in the
whole valley. Standing there, high on its solitary chalk hill, with
the glowing red roofs of the town beneath and the rich green of the
numerous trees clustering all round its base, the whole bathed in
summer sunshine, it is a superb illustration of what a castle should
be—ever-present, magnificent, defiant.

Yet, despite its wonderful situation, the finest without doubt in all
the south of England, Windsor has had little or no history, has rarely
beaten off marauding foes, and seldom taken any part in great national
struggles. Built for a fortress, it has been through the centuries
nothing more than a palace.

Erected by the builder of the Tower, William of Normandy, and
probably for the same purpose, it has passed in many ways through a
parallel existence, has been just what the Tower has been—an intended
stronghold, a prison, and a royal residence. Yet, whereas the Tower
has been intimately bound up with the life of England through many
centuries, Windsor has, with just one or two brief exceptions, been
a thing apart, something living its life in the quiet backwaters of
history.

[Illustration: WINDSOR CASTLE.]

The Windsor district was always a favourite one with the rulers of the
land even before the existence of the Castle. Tradition speaks of a
hunting lodge, deep in the glades of the Old Windsor Forest, close by
the river, as belonging to the redoubtable King Arthur, and declares
that here he and his Knights of the Round Table stayed when they
hunted in the greenwood or sallied forth on those quests of adventure
with which we are all familiar. What is more certain, owing to the
bringing to light of actual remains, is that Old Windsor was a Roman
station. Certainly it was a favourite haunt of the Saxon kings, who in
all probability had a palace of some sort there, close to the Roman
road which passed by way of Staines to the camp at Silchester; and
its value must have been thoroughly recognized. Edward the Confessor
in particular was especially fond of the place, and when he founded
and suitably endowed his wonderful Abbey at Westminster he included
“Windsor and Staines and all that thereto belongs” among his valuable
grants to the foundation over which his friend Edwin presided.

In those days the Castle Hill was not even named. True, its
possibilities as a strategic point were recognized, by Harold if by no
other, for we read in the ancient records that Harold held on that spot
four-and-a-half hides of land for defensive purposes.

But it remained for William the Conqueror, that splendid soldier and
mighty hunter, to recognize the double possibilities of Windsor.
Naturally, following his victory, he made himself familiar with
Harold’s possessions, and, coming shortly to Windsor, saw therein the
means of gratifying two of his main interests. He inspected the ancient
Saxon royal dwelling and saw at once its suitability as a retiring
place for the King, surrounded by the great forest and quite close to
that most convenient of highways, the River. And at the same time,
warrior as he was, he understood the value of the little chalk hill
which stood out from the encompassing clay.

Certainly it belonged to the Abbey as a “perpetual inheritance,” but
to such as William that was not likely to matter much. All England was
his: he could offer what he liked. So he chose for exchange two fat
manors in Essex—Wokendune and Feringes—fine, prosperous agricultural
places, totally different from the unproductive wastelands of Windsor
Hill; and the Abbot, wise man that he was, jumped at the exchange. Thus
the Church was satisfied, no violence was done, and William secured
both the Forest and the magnificent little hill commanding then, as it
does now, many miles of the Thames Valley.

Why did he want it? For two reasons. In the first place, he wanted an
impregnable fortress within striking distance of London. True, under
his orders Gundulf had built the Tower, frowning down on the city of
London; but a fortress which is almost a part of the city, even though
it be built with the one idea of striking awe into the citizens, is
really too close at hand to be secure. A fortress slightly aloof,
and therefore not quite so liable to sudden surprise, yet within a
threatening distance, had vastly greater possibilities.

William’s other great passion was “the chase.” Listen to what the
ancient chronicler said about him: “He made many deer-parks; and he
established laws therewith; so that whosoever slew a hart or a hind
should be deprived of his eyesight. He loved the tall deer as if he
were their father. Hares he decreed should go free. His rich men
bemoaned it; and the poor men shuddered at it. But he was so stern,
that he recked not the hatred of them all; for they must follow withal
the King’s will if they would live, or have land, or possessions, or
even his peace.” For this the surrounding forests rendered the position
of Windsor a delightful one.

Thus came into existence the Norman Keep of Windsor Hill, and beneath
it shortly after the little settlement of New Windsor. When Domesday
Book was prepared the little place had reached the number of one
hundred houses, and thenceforward its progress was steady. By the time
of Edward I. it had developed to such an extent that it was granted a
charter—which document may still be seen in the Bodleian Library at
Oxford.

With the Kings that came after the Conqueror Windsor soon became a
favourite residence. Henry I., marrying a Saxon Princess, Edith, niece
of the Confessor, lived there and built a fine dwelling-place with a
Chapel dedicated to the Confessor and a wall surrounding everything.

During the reign of John, Windsor was besieged on more than one
occasion, and it was from its fastness that the most wretched King
who ever ruled—or misruled—England crept out to meet the Barons near
Runnymede, just over the Surrey border.

Henry III., finding the old fabric seriously damaged by the sieges,
determined to rebuild on a grander scale, and he restored the walls,
raised the first Round Tower, the Lower and Middle Wards, and a Chapel;
but, save one or two fragments, all these have perished.

However, it is to Edward of Windsor—the third King of that name—that we
must look as the real founder of the Windsor of to-day. He rebuilt the
Chapel and practically all the structures of Henry III., and added the
Upper Ward.

In connection with this last a very interesting story is told. Edward
had on the spot two very distinguished prisoners—King David of
Scotland and King John of France—rather more like unwilling guests
than prisoners, since they had plenty of liberty and shared in the
amusements of the Court. One day the two were strolling with Edward in
the Lower Ward, taking stock of the new erections, when King John made
some such remark as this: “Your Grace’s castle would be better on the
higher ground up yonder. You yourself would be able to see more, and
the castle would be visible a greater way off.” In which opinion he was
backed by the King of Scotland. Edward’s reply must have surprised the
pair of them, for he said: “It shall be as you say. I will enlarge the
Castle by adding another ward, and your ransoms shall pay the bill.”
But Edward’s threat was never carried out. King David’s ransom was paid
in 1337, but it only amounted to 100,000 marks; while that of King
John, a matter of a million and a half of our money, was never paid,
and John returned to England to die in the year 1363 in the Palace of
the Savoy.

In the building of Windsor, Edward had for his architect, or
superintendent, a very famous man, William Wykeham, the founder and
builder of Winchester School and New College, Oxford. Wykeham’s salary
was fixed at one shilling a day while at Windsor, and two shillings
while travelling on business connected with the Castle. Wykeham’s chief
work was the erection of the Great Quadrangle, a task which took him
ten years to complete. While there at work, he had a stone engraved
with the Latin words, _Hoc fecit Wykeham_, which translated means
“Wykeham made this.” Edward was enraged when he saw this inscription,
for he wanted no man to share with him the glory of rebuilding Windsor;
and he called his servant to account for his unwise action. Wykeham’s
reply was very ingenious, for he declared that he had meant the motto
to read: “This made Wykeham” (for the words can be translated thus).
The ready answer appeased the King’s wrath.

The method by which the building was done was that of forced labour—a
mild form of slavery. Edward, instead of engaging workmen in the
ordinary way, demanded from each county in England so many masons, so
many carpenters, so many tilers, after the fashion of the feudal method
of obtaining an army. There were 360 of them, and they did not all come
willingly, for certain of them were thrown into prison in London for
running away. Slowly the work proceeded, but in 1361 the plague carried
off many of the craftsmen, and new demands were made on Yorkshire,
Shropshire, and Devon, to provide sixty more stone-workers each. When
at length the structure was completed in 1369, it included most of the
best parts of Windsor Castle—the Great Quadrangle, the Round Tower,
St. George’s Hall and Chapel, and the outer walls with their gates and
turrets.

The Chapel was repaired later on, under the direction of another
distinguished Englishman, Geoffrey Chaucer, the father of English
poetry, who for over a year was “master of the King’s works” at
Windsor. In 1473 the Chapel had become so dilapidated that it was
necessary to pull it down, and Edward IV. erected in its place an
exceedingly beautiful St. George’s Chapel, as an act of atonement for
all the shed blood through which he had wallowed his way to the throne.

Queen Elizabeth was very fond indeed of Windsor, and frequently came
thither in her great barge. She built a banqueting hall and a gallery,
and formed the fine terrace which bears her name. This terrace, on the
north side, above the steep, tree-planted scarp which falls away to
the river valley, is an ideal place. Behind rise the State Apartments:
in front stretches a magnificent panorama across Eton and the plain.
On this terrace the two Charleses loved to stroll; and George III. was
accustomed to walk every day with his family, just an ordinary country
gentleman rubbing shoulders with his neighbours.

It is a wonderful place, is Windsor Castle—very impressive and in
places very beautiful; but there is so much to write about that one
scarcely knows where to begin. Going up Castle Hill, we turn sharp to
the left, and, passing through the Gateway of Henry VIII., we are in
the Lower Ward, with St. George’s Chapel facing us in all its beauty.

This fine perpendicular Chapel is, indeed, worthy of the illustrious
order, the Knights of the Garter, for whom it is a place both of
worship and of ceremonial.

The Order of the Knights of the Garter was founded by Edward III. in
the year 1349, and there were great doings at Windsor on the appointed
day—St. George’s Day. Splendid pageants, grand tournaments, and
magnificent feasts, with knights in bright armour and their ladies in
the gayest of colours, were by no means uncommon in those days; but on
this occasion the spectacle was without parallel for brilliance, for
Edward had summoned to the great tournament all the bravest and most
famous knights in Christendom, and all had come save those of Spain,
forbidden by their suspicious King. From their number twenty-six were
chosen to found the Order, with the King at their head.

St. George’s Chapel has some very beautiful stained-glass windows,
some fine tracery in its roof, and a number of very interesting
monuments. The carved stalls in the choir, with the banners of the
knights drooping overhead, remind us certainly of the Henry VII.
Chapel at Westminster. Within the Chapel walls have been enacted some
wonderful scenes—scenes pleasing, and scenes memorable for their
sorrow. Here have been brought, at the close of their busy lives, many
of England’s sovereigns, and here some of them—Henry VI. and Edward IV.
among them—rest from their labours. Queen Victoria, who loved Windsor,
lies with her husband in the Royal Tomb at Frogmore, not far away.

The Round Tower, which stands practically in the centre of the
clustered buildings and surmounts everything, is always one of the most
interesting places. From its battlements may be seen on a clear day no
less than twelve counties. We can trace the River for miles and miles
as it comes winding down the valley from Clewer and Boveney, to pass
away into the distance where we can just faintly discern the dome of
St. Paul’s.




CHAPTER SEVEN

_Eton College_


Standing on the north terrace, or on the hundred steps which ascend
from Thames Street, with behind us the fabric which William Wykeham did
so much to fashion, we gaze out to yet another place which Wykeham made
possible—the famous College of Eton.

True, he had nothing whatever to do with the building of Eton itself,
but he founded Winchester School, which is commonly spoken of as
England’s oldest public school; and this served the boy-king, Henry
VI., as a model for his new foundation, so that Eton is in many
respects, both as regards buildings and management, a copy of the older
place.

The first charter is dated 1441. Henry was then only nineteen years
old, yet he says that “from the very foundation of his riper age” he
dreamed of “a solemn school at Eton where a great number of children
should be freely taught the rules of grammar.” The school was to be
called “The Kynges College of oure Ladye of Eton, beside Wyndesore.”

[Illustration: Eton College]

Henry, in order that he might be certain he and his assistants were
following the excellent Winchester model, paid a number of visits to
that school, and made a close study of its ways. There he was brought
much into contact with William Waynflete, who had become master of
Winchester in 1429 and done much to keep the school at its high level;
and the result was that in 1442 Henry persuaded him to become the
first master of Eton, whither he came, bringing with him from the
older foundation half-a-dozen favourite scholars to be a model for all
newcomers. Eton began with “twenty-five poor scholars” to be educated
at the King’s cost, but this number was soon increased to seventy.

Henry did not live to see his splendid scheme in being. In fact, the
beautiful chapel which he had designed was never completed at all;
moreover, the fabric itself, which he had desired to be made of “the
hard stone of Kent,” was very largely built of brick. Nor did the
College as a whole rise into being in one great effort. Like most
historic buildings, it grew little by little into its present self,
with just a bit added here and a bit renovated there, so that the whole
thing is a medley of styles.

In these days Eton, like most of the big public schools, is far from
being what its founder intended it to be—a school for the instruction
of deserving poor boys. Instead it has become a very exclusive college
for the education of the sons of the rich.

There are usually just over eleven hundred boys in residence, seventy
of whom are known as “collegers,” while the other thousand odd are
called “oppidans.” For the old statute which decided on the number of
“collegers” as seventy is still obeyed, and Henry’s wish is kept in
the letter, if not in the spirit. The “collegers” live in the actual
College buildings, have their meals in the College Hall; and they wear
cloth gowns to distinguish them from the rest of the scholars. These
other thousand odd boys, the sons of gentlemen and other folk who can
afford to pay the great sum of money necessary, live in the various
masters’ houses, which are built close at hand.

The “collegers,” who win their positions as the result of a stiff
examination, are practically the holders of very valuable scholarships,
for they pay only small sums towards their expenses. And, generally
speaking, they have a better time of it, even though they may be looked
down on and called “tugs” by some of the more snobbish “oppidans”; for
the College buildings are better than most of the houses. Moreover,
the “collegers” have two large playing fields of their own, so that
they can avoid the crush in the school fields.

Just when the “oppidans” began to take their place is by no means
certain; but it could not have been very long after the foundation, for
there is actually in existence the letter of an “oppidan” written in
the year 1467, forty years after the opening. It is a very interesting
letter, written to the boy’s elder brother, and enclosing for his
inspection a specimen of the writer’s Latin verses (the making of Latin
verse has always been a speciality at Eton). The letter also suggests
the forwarding of “12 lbs. of figgs and 8 lbs. of raisins,” so, you
see, boys were boys even in those far-off days.

Many of Eton’s most picturesque customs have either died out or been
suppressed by the authorities. One of the more famous of these was
“Montem,” given up in 1847. On a certain day, once every three years,
the scholars marched in procession to Salt Hill—that is, to “the
mountain” (_ad montem_ means “to the mountain”); and there certain of
their number made a collection of money from all and sundry, giving
little pieces of salt in exchange. Usually royalty from Windsor met
them there, and contributed generously to the fund. “Montem” was a
gay festival, for fancy-dress was the order of the day, and there was
plenty of noise and colour as the merry procession made its way up the
hill to the music of several bands, followed by a crowd of visitors.
In 1846 the authorities decided to put an end to the celebration,
because with the coming of the railway to Windsor an unwelcome crowd
of excursionists presented itself each year, and the picturesque
gathering degenerated into a vulgar rabble. One old custom which still
survives is “Threepenny Day.” On the 27th day of February each year,
the anniversary of the death of a Provost named Lupton, builder of the
picturesque gateway, each of the “collegers” receives a bright new
threepenny-bit, provision for which is made in a sum of money left by
Lupton and another Provost.

Eton, like that other and older seat of learning to which many Etonians
make the journey up the valley, gains much from its nearness to the
River, for swimming and rowing are two favourite pastimes with the boys
of this school. The latter pastime reaches its zenith on the “fourth
of June”—the great day which Eton keeps in honour of George III.’s
birthday. Then the College is besieged by hundreds of relatives and
friends, and there is a fine water-carnival on the River.




CHAPTER EIGHT

_Hampton Court_


Nearly twenty miles below Windsor we come upon the ancient palace of
Hampton, better known in these days as Hampton Court, beautifully
situated among tall trees not far from the river bank. It is a
wonderful old place—one of the nation’s priceless possessions—and once
inside we are loth to leave it, for there is something attractive about
its quaint old courtyards and its restful, bird-haunted gardens.

Certainly it is the largest royal palace in England, and in some
respects it is the finest. Yet, strangely enough, it was not built for
a King, nor has any sovereign lived in it since the days of George II.
Wolsey, the proud Cardinal of Henry VIII.’s days, erected it for his
own private mansion, and it is still the Cardinal’s fabric which we
look upon as we pass through the older portions of the great pile of
buildings.

[Illustration: HAMPTON COURT, GARDEN FRONT.]

Wolsey was, as you probably know, the son of a comparatively poor man,
yet he was possessed of great gifts, and when he left Oxford he soon
rose to a position of eminence. The Kings, first of all Henry VII.,
then “bluff King Hal,” showered honours and gifts on him. The Pope
created him a Cardinal, and Henry VIII. gave him the powerful position
of Lord Chancellor of England. Wolsey, as befitted his high station,
lived a life of great splendour, the pomp and show of his household
rivalling even that of the King. Naturally such a man would have the
best, even of palaces.

As we pass through the wonderful old courts of the Cardinal’s dwelling
we can imagine the vast amount of money which it must have cost to
build, for it was magnificent in those days quite beyond parallel; and
we cannot wonder that King Henry thought that such a building ought to
be nothing less than a royal residence.

Little differences soon arose. Wolsey, indeed, had not lived long at
Hampton Court when there came an open breach between the King and
himself. The trouble increased, and he fell from his high place very
rapidly. When in 1526 he presented Hampton Court Palace to the King
something other than generosity must have prompted the gift.

Henry VIII. at once proceeded to make the palace more magnificent
still. He pulled down the Cardinal’s banqueting hall and erected a
more sumptuous one in its place; and this we can see to-day. Built in
the style known to architects as Tudor, it is one of the finest halls
in the whole of our land. Many huge beams of oak, beautifully fitted,
carved, and ornamented, support a magnificent panelled and decorated
roof, while glorious stained-glass windows (copies of the original ones
fitted under Henry VIII.’s directions) fill the place with subdued
light. The Great Gatehouse also belongs to Henry’s additions, and,
with its octagonal towers and great pointed arch, has a very royal and
imposing appearance.

Though no sovereign has dwelt in the palace for a century or more, it
was for nearly two hundred years a favourite residence of our Kings
and Queens, and many famous events have taken place within its walls.
Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth were both very partial to the palace
and its delightful gardens, and they spent much time there. Indeed, it
is said that the latter was dining at Hampton when the glorious news
of Drake’s defeat of the Spanish Armada was carried to her. James I.
resided at the palace after his succession to the throne, and there, in
addition to selling quite openly any number of knighthoods and peerages
in order that he might add to his scanty means, he held the famous
conference which decided that a uniform and authorized translation of
the Bible should be made. In the great hall countless plays and masques
were performed, and probably the mighty Shakespeare himself visited the
place. King Charles I. spent many days at the Court, some of them as a
prisoner of the Parliamentary soldiers; and here too Cromwell made a
home until shortly before the time of his death. After the Restoration
Charles II. and his Court settled at the palace, and in the surrounding
parks indulged their fondness for the chase.

Immediately Mary and her husband, William of Orange, came to the
throne they commenced the alterations which have largely given us the
palace of to-day. The old State apartments were pulled down and, under
the direction of Sir Christopher Wren, larger and more magnificent
ones were erected, something on the lines of the famous French royal
palace at Versailles. At the same time William ordered the grounds to
be laid out in the style of the famous Dutch gardens. The next three
sovereigns, Anne, and the first and second Georges, all lived at the
Court; but from that time onwards it ceased to be a royal residence.
George III. would not go near the place. The story is told that on
one occasion at Hampton Court his grandfather boxed his ears soundly,
and he vowed never again to live on the scene of such an indignity.
At any rate, he divided up its thousand rooms into private suites of
apartments, which were given as residences to persons of high social
position whose incomes were not large enough to keep them. And to this
day a very considerable portion of the palace is shut off from public
view for the same purpose.

However, the parts which we can visit are extremely interesting.
Entering at the main gate by Molesey Bridge, we cross the outer Green
Court and come to the Moat. In Wolsey’s time this was crossed by a
drawbridge of the sort in use when palaces were fortresses as well
as dwelling-places. We now pass into the buildings over a fine old
battlemented Tudor bridge.

This was built by Henry VIII. in honour of Anne Boleyn; but for
centuries it lay buried and forgotten. Then one day, just before the
War, workmen came upon it quite accidentally as they were cleaning out
the old Moat.

Once through the gateway we come straight into the first of the
old-world courtyards—the Base Court—and we feel almost as if we had
stepped back several hundred years into a bygone age. The deep red
brickwork of the battlements and the walls, the quaint chimneys,
doorways, windows, and turrets, all belong to the distant past; they
make on us an impression which not even the splendour of Wren’s
additions can remove. Passing through another gateway—Anne Boleyn’s—we
come into the Clock Court, so called because of the curious old
timepiece above the archway. This clock was specially constructed for
Henry VIII., and for centuries it has gone on telling the minute of the
hour, the hour of the day, the day of the month, and the month of the
year.

The Great Hall, which we may approach by a stairway leading up from
Anne Boleyn’s Gateway is, as we have already said, a magnificent
apartment. The glory of its elaborate roof can never be forgotten.
Hanging on its walls are some very famous tapestries which have been
at Hampton Court since the days of Henry VIII. Among these are “tenne
pieces of new arras of the Historie of Abraham,” made in Brussels—some
of the richest and most beautiful examples of the art of weaving
ever produced. From the Great Hall we pass into what is known as the
Watching Chamber or the Great Guard Room—the apartment in which the
guards assembled when the monarch was at dinner, and through which
passed all who desired audience of their sovereign. On its walls are
wonderful old Flemish tapestries which once belonged to Wolsey himself.
From the Watching Chamber we pass to another chamber through which the
dishes were taken to the tables which stood on the dais at the end of
the Hall.

Returning once more to the ground floor we go through a hall and find
ourselves in Fountain Court. Here we enter another world entirely.
Behind us are the quaint, old-fashioned courtyards, and the beautiful,
restful Tudor buildings. The sudden change to Wren’s architecture
has an effect almost startling. Yet when once we have forgotten the
older buildings and become used to the very different style we see
that Wren’s work has a beauty of its own. The newer buildings are
very extensive, and the State apartments are filled with pictures and
furniture of great interest. Entrance is obtained by what is called
the King’s Great Staircase. The first room, entered by a fine doorway,
is the Guard Room, a fine, lofty chamber with the upper part of its
wall decorated with thousands of old weapons—guns, bayonets, pistols,
swords, etc. From thence we pass to the round of the magnificent
royal apartments—King’s rooms, Queen’s rooms, and so on, some thirty
or more of them—all filled with priceless treasures—beautiful and
rare paintings, delightful carvings from the master hand of Grinling
Gibbons, so delicate and natural that it is difficult to believe they
are made of wood, furniture of great historical interest and beauty.
Here are the famous pictures—the “Triumph of Julius Cæsar,” nine
large canvases showing the Roman emperor returning in triumph from
one of his many wars. These were painted by Mantegna, the celebrated
Italian artist, and originally formed part of the great collection
brought together at Hampton Court by Charles I. They are a priceless
possession. Here, too, are the famous “Hampton Court Beauties” and
“Windsor Beauties,” the first painted by Sir Godfrey Kneller, the
second by Sir Peter Lely, each portraying a number of famous beauties
of the Court. Walking leisurely round these apartments we can obtain
an excellent idea of the elaborate style of furnishing which was
fashionable two or three centuries ago.

Yet, despite all these most valuable relics of the past, which many
people come half across the world to view, for some folk the supreme
attraction of Hampton Court will always be the gardens. Very beautiful
they are too—the result of centuries of loving care by those, Kings
and commoners, who had time and inclination to think of garden making.
Perhaps to William of Orange must be given greatest credit in the
matter, for it was he who ordered the setting-out of the long, shady
avenues and alleys, and the velvety lawns and orderly paths. But we
must not forget our debt of gratitude to Henry for the wonderful little
sunken garden on the south side of the palace, perhaps one of the
finest little old English gardens still in existence; and to Charles I.
for the Canal, over a mile long, with its shady walk, and its birds and
fishes, and its air of dreamy contentment.

Tens of thousands visit these grounds in the summer months, and the
old grape-vine is always one of the chief attractions. Planted as long
ago as 1768, it still flourishes and bears an abundant crop each year,
sometimes as many as 2,500 bunches, all of fine quality. Its main stem
is now over four feet in circumference, and its longest branch about
one hundred and twenty feet in length. On the east front, stretching
in one unbroken line across the Home Park for three-quarters of a mile
towards Kingston, is the Long Water, an ornamental lake made by Charles
II. North of the buildings is another garden, known as the Wilderness,
and here we may find the celebrated Maze, constructed in the time of
William and Mary. This consists of a great number of winding and
zig-zag paths, hedged on each side with yew and other shrubs; and the
puzzle is to find the way into the little open space in the centre.
On almost any day in the summer can be heard the merry laughter of
visitors who have lost their way in the labyrinth of paths.

Still farther north lies Bushey Park, with its famous Chestnut Avenue,
stretching over a mile in the direction of Teddington. Here are more
than a thousand acres of the finest English parkland; and this,
together with the large riverside stretch known as the Home Park,
formed the royal demesne in which the monarchs and their followers
hunted the deer.

As was said at the beginning of the chapter, only with reluctance do we
leave Hampton Court, partly because of its very great beauty, partly
because of its enthralling historical associations. As we turn our
backs on the great Chancellor’s memorial, we think perhaps a trifle
sadly of all that the place must have meant to Wolsey, and there
come to mind those resounding words which Shakespeare put into his
mouth—“Farewell, a long farewell, to all my greatness.”




CHAPTER NINE

_Kingston_


Already we have seen that in many cases, if not in most, the River has
founded the towns on its banks. These have sprung up originally to
guard either an important crossing or the junction of a tributary with
the main stream or a “gate” where the River has found a way through the
hills; and then, outliving the period of their military usefulness,
they have developed later into centres of some commercial importance.
Thus it has been with Kingston-upon-Thames, a place of ancient fame,
for, according to the geology of the district, there must have been at
this spot one of the lowest fords of the River.

That there was on Kingston Hill a Roman station guarding that ford
there can be very little doubt; and there are evidences that a
considerable Roman town was situated here, for the Roman remains
brought to light have been fairly abundant.

Workmen digging or ploughing on the hillside up towards Coombe Warren
have, at various times in the past, discovered the foundations of Roman
villas, with gold, silver, and bronze coins of the fourth century, and
numerous household goods, and in one place a cemetery full of funeral
urns.

But it was not till Saxon times that Kingston came to the heyday of its
existence. Then it was a place of the greatest possible importance,
for here England was united into one country under one King. Prior
to the union England was divided off into a number of states, which
found amusement in fighting each other when they were not fighting
the ancient Britons in their western fastnesses. These states were
Northumbria, in the north; Mercia in the Midlands; Wessex in the
south-west; and, in addition, the smaller areas of East Anglia, Essex,
and Kent. When any one chieftain or king was sufficiently strong to
defeat the others, and make them do his will, he became for the time
being the “bretwalda,” or overlord; but it was a very precarious
honour. The kings in turn won the distinction, but the greater ones
emerged from the struggle, and in the end Egbert, king of Wessex, by
subduing the Mercians, became so powerful that all the other kings
submitted to him. Thus Egbert became the first king or overlord of all
the English (827), and picked on Kingston as the place for his great
council or witenagemot.

Then followed the terrible years of the Danish invasions, and England
was once more split up into sections; but the trouble passed, and
Edward the Elder, elected and crowned king of Wessex at Kingston,
eventually became the real King of England, the first to be addressed
in those terms by the Pope of Rome.

Thence onward Kingston was the recognized place of coronation for the
English Kings, till Edward the Confessor allotted that distinction to
his new Abbey at Westminster. In addition, it was one of the royal
residences and the home of the Bishops of Winchester, whose palace was
situated where now a narrow street, called Bishop’s Hall, runs down
from Thames Street to the River. So that Kingston’s position as one of
the chief towns of Wessex was acknowledged.

The stone on which the Saxon Kings were crowned stands now quite close
to the market-place, jealously guarded by proper railings, as such a
treasure should be. Originally it was housed in a little chapel, called
the Chapel of St. Mary, close to the Parish Church, and with it were
preserved effigies of the sovereigns crowned; but unfortunately in the
year 1730 the chapel collapsed, killing the foolish sexton who had been
digging too close to the foundations. Then for years the stone was
left out in the market-place, unhonoured and almost unrecognized, till
in the year 1850 it was rescued and mounted in its present position.
According to the inscription round the base, the English Kings crowned
at Kingston included Edward the Elder (902), Athelstan (924), Edmund I.
(940), Edred (946), Edwy the Fair (955), Edward the Martyr (975), and
Ethelred II. (979).

That most wretched of monarchs, King John, gave the town its first
charter, and for a time at least resided here. In the High Street
there is now shown a quaint old building to which the title of “King
John’s Dairy” has been given, and this possibly marks the situation of
the King’s dwelling-place.

There was a castle here from quite early days, for we read that in
1263, when Henry III. was fighting against his barons, Kingston Castle
fell into the hands of de Montfort’s colleagues, who captured and held
the young Prince Edward; and that Henry returned in the following year
and won the castle back again. At the spot where Eden Street joins the
London Road were found the remains of walls of great thickness, and
these, which are still to be seen in the cellars of houses there, are
commonly supposed to be the foundations of a castle held by the Earls
of Warwick at the time of the Wars of the Roses, and possibly of an
even earlier structure.

Right down through history Kingston, probably by reason of its
important river crossing, has had its peaceful life disturbed at
intervals by the various national struggles. Armies have descended on
it suddenly, stayed the night, taken their fill, and gone on their
way; a few have come and stayed. Monarchs have broken their journeys
at this convenient spot, or have dined here in state to show their
favour. For Kingston, as the King’s “tun” or town should, has always
been a distinctly Royalist town, has invariably declared for the
sovereign—right or wrong.

[Illustration: KINGSTON.]

Thus in 1554, when young Sir Thomas Wyatt raised his army of ten
thousand to attack London, and found the Bridge too strong to force,
he made his way westwards to the convenient crossing at Kingston; but
the inhabitants broke down their bridge to delay his progress, and so
enabled Mary to get together a force; for which act of devotion the
citizens were rewarded with a free charter by Queen Mary.

Similarly, in the Civil War the town stood firmly by Charles, despite
the fact that the town was occupied by cavaliers and roundheads in
turn. Thus in October, 1642, the Earl of Essex settled down with
several thousand men; while in November Sir Richard Onslow came to
defend the crossing. But the inhabitants showed themselves extremely
“malignant”; though when, just after, the King came to the town with
his army he was greeted with every sign of joyous welcome.

Also at Kingston occurred one of the numerous risings which happened
during the year 1648. All over the land the Royalists gathered men
and raised the King’s standard, hoping that Parliament would not be
able to cope with so many simultaneous insurrections. In July the
Earl of Holland, High Steward of Kingston, the Duke of Buckingham,
and his brother Lord Francis Villiers, got together a force of
several hundred horsemen, but they were heavily defeated by a force of
Parliamentarians, and Lord Villiers was killed.

[Illustration: Teddington Weir]

Nowadays, despite the fact that the town has held its own through
a thousand years, neither losing in fame a great deal nor gaining,
Kingston does not give one any impression of age. True, it has some
ancient dwellings here and there, but for the most part they are hidden
away behind unsightly commercial frontages.

Between Kingston and Richmond the River sweeps round in an inverted
=S=-bend, passing on the way Teddington and Twickenham, formerly
two very pretty riverside villages. The former possess the lowest
pound-lock on the River (with the exception of that of the half-tide
lock at Richmond), and also a considerable weir. It is the point at
which the tide reaches its limit, and thereby gets its name Teddington,
or Tide-ending-town.




CHAPTER TEN

_Richmond_


Richmond is an old place with a new name, for though its history goes
back to Saxon times, it did not get its present name till the reign of
Henry VII., when “Harry of Richmond” rechristened it in allusion to the
title which he received from the Yorkshire town. Prior to that it had
always been called Sheen, and the name still survives in an outlying
part of the town.

Sheen Manor House had been right from Saxon days a hunting lodge and
an occasional dwelling for the Sovereigns, but Edward III. built a
substantial palace, and, absolutely deserted by all his friends, died
in it in the year 1377. He was succeeded by his young grandson, the
Black Prince’s child Richard, who spent most of his childhood with his
mother Joan at Kingston Castle, just a mile or two higher upstream.
Richard’s wife, Queen Anne of Bohemia, died in Sheen Palace in the
year 1394, and Richard was so upset that he had the palace pulled down,
and never visited Sheen again.

[Illustration: Richmond Hill from Petersham Meadows]

This, however, by no means ended the life of Sheen as a royal
residence, for Henry V. built a new house, and when, in 1498, this was
burned down, Henry VII. built a new palace on a much grander scale,
and at the same time gave it the name which it still bears. With the
Tudor kings and queens Richmond was a very great favourite. “Bluff King
Hal” loved to hunt in its woodland, and here, in 1603, “good Queen
Bess” died, after forty-five years of a troublous but prosperous and
progressive reign. Charles I. spent much of his time here, and he it
was who added Richmond Park to the royal domain in the year 1637.

After the Civil War the palace was set aside for the use of the
widowed Queen Henrietta Maria, but by that time it had got into a very
dilapidated condition; and little or nothing was done to improve it.
So that before long this once stately palace fell to pieces and was
removed piecemeal. Now all that remains of it is a gateway by Richmond
Green.

Richmond to-day is merely a suburb of London, one of the pleasure
grounds of the city’s countless workers, who come hither on Saturdays
and Sundays either to find exercise and enjoyment on the River, or
to breathe the pure air of the park. This New Park, so called to
distinguish it from the Old Deer Park, which lies at the other end of
the town, is a very fine place indeed. Surrounded by a wall about
eleven miles long, it covers 2,250 acres of splendid park and woodland,
with glorious views in all directions. In it are to be found numerous
deer which spend their young days here, and later are transferred to
Windsor Park. The Old Deer Park, of which about a hundred acres are
open to the public for football, golf, tennis, and other pastimes, lies
by the riverside between the town and Kew Gardens.

[Illustration: From the Terrace Richmond]

The view of the River Thames from the Terrace on Richmond Hill is
world-famous. Countless artists have painted it, and many writers have
described it; and probably it has deserved all the good things said
about it, for even now, spoiled as it is by odd factory chimneys and
unsightly buildings dotted about, it still remains one of the most
delightful vistas of the silvery, winding River. Those of you who
have read Scott’s “Heart of Midlothian” will probably remember the
passage (chapter xxxvi.) which describes it: “The equipage stopped
on a commanding eminence, where the beauty of English landscape was
displayed in its utmost luxuriance. Here the Duke alighted and desired
Jeanie to follow him. They paused for a moment on the brow of a hill,
to gaze on the unrivalled landscape which it presented. A huge sea
of verdure, with crossing and intersecting promontories of massive
and tufted groves, was tenanted by numberless flocks and herds, which
seemed to wander unrestrained and unbounded through the rich pastures.
The Thames, here turreted with villas and there garlanded with
forests, moved on slowly and placidly, like the mighty monarch of the
scene, to whom all its other beauties were but accessories, and bore
on its bosom a hundred barks and skiffs, whose white sails and gaily
fluttering pennons gave life to the whole. The Duke was, of course,
familiar with this scene; but to a man of taste it must be always new.”

Nor have the poets been behindhand with their appreciation, as the
following extract from James Thomson’s “Seasons” shows:

“Heavens! what a goodly prospect spreads around, Of hills, and dales,
and woods, and lawns, and spires, And glittering towers, and gilded
streams, till all The stretching landscape into smoke decays.”




CHAPTER ELEVEN

_Richmond to Westminster_


Just below Richmond, on the borders of the Middlesex village of
Isleworth, there is a foot-passenger toll-bridge, with what is known as
a half-tide lock. The arches of this bridge are open to river traffic
during the first half of the ebb-tide and the second half of the flow,
but the River is dammed for the remainder of the day in order that
sufficient water may be kept in the stretch immediately above. This,
for the present, is the last obstruction on the journey seawards.

Isleworth, with its riverside church, its ancient inn, “The London
Apprentice,” and its great flour-mill, is a typical riverside village
which has lived on out of the past. Between it and Brentford lies the
magnificent seat of the Dukes of Northumberland—Sion House—a fine
dwelling situated in a delightful expanse of parkland facing Kew
Gardens on the Surrey shore.

Of Kew Gardens, which stretch beside the River from the Old Deer Park
almost to Kew Bridge, it is difficult for one who loves nature to speak
in moderate terms, for it is one of the most delightful places in the
whole of our land. At every season of the year, almost every day, there
is some fresh enchantment, some glory of tree or flower unfolding
itself, so that one can go there year after year, week in and week out,
without exhausting its treasure-house of wonders, even though there is
only a matter of 350 acres to explore.

[Illustration:

KEW PALACE AND KEW GARDENS.]

The Royal Botanical Gardens, as their proper name is, were first
laid out by George III. in the year 1760, and were presented to the
nation by Queen Victoria in the year 1840. Since then the authorities
have planned and worked assiduously and wisely to bring together a
botanical collection of such scope and admirable arrangement that
it is practically without rival in the world. Here may be seen,
flourishing in various huge glasshouses, the most beautiful of tropical
and semi-tropical plants—palms, ferns, cacti, orchids, giant lilies,
etc.; while in the magnificently laid out grounds are to be found
flowers, trees, and shrubs of all kinds growing in a delightful
profusion. There is not a dull spot anywhere; while the rhododendron
dell, the azalea garden, the rock garden, and the rose walks are
indescribably beautiful. Nor is beauty the only consideration, for the
carefully planned gardens, with their splendid museum, are of untold
value to the gardener and the botanist.

Nor must we forget that Kew had its palace. Frederick, Prince of Wales,
father of George III. and great patron of Surrey cricket, resided at
Kew House, as did his son after him. The son pulled down the mansion in
1803 and erected another in its place; and, not to be outdone, George
IV. in turn demolished this. The smaller dwelling-house—dignified now
by the title of palace—a homely red-brick building, known in Queen
Anne’s time as the “Dutch House,” was built in the reign of James I. In
it died Queen Charlotte.

If we speak with unstinting praise of Kew, what shall we say of
Brentford, opposite it on the Middlesex side of the stream? Surely no
county in England has a more untidy and squalid little county town. Its
long main street is narrow to the point of danger, so that it has been
necessary to construct at great cost a new arterial road which will
avoid Brentford altogether; while many of its byways can be dignified
by no better word than slums. Yet Brentford in the past was a place of
some note in Middlesex, and had its share of history. Indeed, in recent
times it has laid claim to be the “ford” where Julius Cæsar crossed on
his way to Verulam, a claim which for years was held undisputedly by
Cowey Stakes, near Walton.

Now the Great Western Railway Company’s extensive docks, where numerous
barges discharge and receive their cargoes, and the incidental sidings
and warehouses, the gas-works, the various factories and commercial
buildings, make riverside Brentford a thing of positive ugliness.

On the bank above the ferry, close to the spot where the little Brent
River joins the main stream, the inhabitants, proud of their share
in the nation’s struggles, have erected a granite pillar with the
following brief recital of the town’s claims to notoriety:

54 B.C.—At this ancient fortified ford the British tribesmen, under
Cassivelaunus, bravely opposed Julius Cæsar on his march to Verulamium.

A.D. 780-1.—Near by Offa, King of Mercia, with his Queen, the bishops,
and principal officers, held a Council of the Church.

A.D. 1016.—Here Edmund Ironside, King of England, drove Cnut and his
defeated Danes across the Thames.

A.D. 1640.—Close by was fought the Battle of Brentford between the
forces of King Charles I. and the Parliament.

From Kew Bridge onwards the River loses steadily in charm if it gains
somewhat in importance. The beauty which has clung to it practically
all the way from the Cotswolds now almost entirely disappears, giving
place to a generally depressing aspect, relieved here and there with
just faint suggestions of the receding charm.

A short distance downstream is Mortlake, once a pretty little riverside
village, now almost a suburb of London, and quite uninteresting save
that it marks the finish of the University Boatrace. This, as all folk
in the Thames Valley (and many out of it) are aware, is rowed each year
upstream from Putney to Mortlake, usually on the flood-tide.

[Illustration:

PUTNEY to MORTLAKE Championship Course]

Barnes, on the Surrey shore, is a very ancient place. The Manor of
Barn Elmes was presented by Athelstan (925-940) to the canons of St.
Paul’s, and by them it has been held ever since. The name possibly came
from the great barn or spicarium, which the canons had on the spot. The
place is now the home of the Ranelagh Club—a famous club for outdoor
pursuits, notably polo, golf, and tennis.

Fulham Palace, on the Middlesex bank, not far from Putney Bridge, is
the “country residence” of the Bishops of London. For nine centuries
the Bishops have held the manor of Fulham, and during most of the time
have had their domicile in the village. In these days, when Fulham is
one of the utterly dreary districts of London, with acres and acres
of dull, commonplace streets, it is hard indeed to think of it as a
fresh riverside village with fine old mansions and a wide expanse of
market-gardens and a moat-surrounded palace hidden among the tall trees.

[Illustration:

Fulham Palace The Quadrangle Fitz James Gateway.]

The River now begins to run through London proper, and from its banks
rise wharves, warehouses, factories, and numerous other indications
of its manifold commercial activities. Thus it continues on past
Wandsworth, where the tiny river Wandle joins forces and where there
is talk of erecting another half-tide lock, past Fulham, Chelsea,
Battersea, Pimlico, Vauxhall, and Lambeth, on to Westminster.

[Illustration: RANELAGH.]

At Chelsea and Vauxhall were situated those famous pleasure-gardens—the
Ranelagh and Cremorne Gardens at the former, and the Spring Gardens
at the latter—which during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
provided London with so much in the way of entertainment. Vauxhall
Gardens were opened to the public some time after the Restoration, and
at once became popular, so that folk of all sorts, rich and poor alike,
came to pass a pleasant evening. An account written in 1751 speaks of
the gardens as “laid out in so grand a taste that they are frequented
in the three summer months by most of the nobility and gentry then
in or near London.” The following passage from Smollett’s “Humphrey
Clinker” aptly describes the dazzling scene: “A spacious garden, part
laid out in delightful walks, bounded with high hedges and trees, and
paved with gravel; part exhibiting a wonderful assemblage of the most
picturesque and striking objects, pavilions, lodges, graves, grottos,
lawns, temples, and cascades; porticoes, colonnades, rotundas; adorned
with pillars, statues, and paintings; the whole illuminated with an
infinite number of lamps, disposed in different figures of suns, stars,
and constellations; the place crowded with the gayest company, ranging
through those blissful shades, and supping in different lodges on
cold collations, enlivened with mirth, freedom, and good humour, and
animated by an excellent band of music.”

In the early days most of the folk came by water, and the river was
gay with boatloads of revellers Barges and boats waited each evening
at Westminster and Whitehall Stairs in readiness for passengers; and
similarly at various places along the city front craft plied for hire
to convey the citizens, their wives and daughters, and even their
apprentices.

Ranelagh was not quite so ancient, and it encouraged a slightly better
class of visitor: otherwise it was the counterpart of Vauxhall, as was
Cremorne. It was famous, among other things, for its regatta. In 1775
this was a tremendous water-carnival. The River from London Bridge
westwards was covered with boats of all sorts, and stands were erected
on the banks for the convenience of spectators.

Ranelagh was demolished in 1805, but Vauxhall persisted right on till
1859, when it too came under the auctioneer’s hammer. Where Cremorne
once stood is now the huge power-station so prominent in this stretch
of the river; and the famous coffee-house kept by “Don Saltero” in the
early eighteenth century was in Cheyne Walk.

Chelsea in its day has achieved fame in quite a variety of ways.
Apart from its pleasure gardens it has come to be well-known for its
beautiful old physic-garden; its hospital for aged soldiers, part
of the gardens of which were included in Ranelagh; its bun-house;
its pottery; and last, but by no means least, for its association
with literary celebrities. Here have lived, and worked, and, in some
cases, died, writers of such different types as Sir Thomas More,
whose headless body was buried in the church, John Locke, Addison,
Swift, Smollett, Carlyle—the “sage of Chelsea”—Leigh Hunt, Rossetti,
Swinburne, and Kingsley. Artists, too, have congregated in these quiet
streets, and the names of Turner and Whistler will never be forgotten.

[Illustration: THE POWER-STATION, CHELSEA.]

At Lambeth may still be seen the famous palace of the Archbishops of
Canterbury, a beautiful building of red-brick and stone, standing in
an old-world garden. Some parts of it are very old: one, the Lollards’
Tower, is an exceedingly fine relic of medieval building. Close at
hand stands the huge pile of buildings which house the pottery works
of Messrs. Doulton. For some reason or other Lambeth has long been
associated with this industry.

[Illustration: THE LOLLARDS’ TOWER, LAMBETH PALACE.]

As early as 1670 one Edward Warner sold potters’ clay here, and
exported it in huge quantities to Holland and other countries, and
various potters, some Dutch, settled in the district. All this stretch
of the River seems to have been famous for its china-works in the past,
for there were celebrated potteries at Fulham, Chelsea, and Battersea
as well. Of these Battersea has passed away, and its productions are
eagerly sought after by collectors, but Fulham and Lambeth remain,
while Chelsea, after a long interval, is reviving this ancient craft.

Thus we have traversed in fancy the whole of this wonderful
River—so fascinating to both young and old, to both studious and
pleasure-seeking. The more we learn of it the more we are enthralled by
its story, by the immense share it has had in the shaping of England’s
destinies.

We started with a consideration of what those wonderful people the
geologists could tell us of the River in dim, prehistoric days; and we
feel inclined to turn once more to them in conclusion. For they tell
us now that the Thames is growing less; that, just as in times past
it captured the waters of other streams and reduced them to trickling
nothings, so in turn it is succumbing day by day to the depredations
of the River Ouse, which is slowly cutting off its head. Some day,
perhaps, the Thames will be just a tiny rivulet, and the Port of London
will be no more; but I think the tides will ebb and flow under London
Bridge many times before it comes to pass.




INDEX

Abingdon, 263-5

Alfred, King, 141, 249

All Hallows, Barking, 75

Ancient Britons, 120-6

Arnold, Matthew, 261

Arthur, King, 287


Barking, 71-6 Abbey, 72-5 Sewage Works, 75-6

Barnes, 338-9

Battersea, 340, 347

Baynards Castle, 160

Becket, Thomas, 145, 151, 274

Benfleet, 39

Besant, Sir Walter, 162-3, 184

Big Ben, 225

Billingsgate, 101-2

Black Death, 161

Blackfriars, 195-7

Blackwall, 112-3 Tunnel, 113

Boatrace, Universities, 259, 338

Boleyn, Anne, 175-7, 310-11

Brentford, 336

Bridges, 205, 230, 232, 242

Buckingham Palace, 208

Bushey Park, 316


Canning Town, 114

Canute, 141-2

Canvey Island, 38-9

Cement, 49, 55-6

Chatham, 46-7

Chaucer, Geoffrey, 162, 294

Chelsea, 341, 343-4, 347

Cherwell, 257-8

Chilterns, 10, 268-70

Cholsey, 284

Churn, River, 240

Cleopatra’s Needle, 228

Cliveden Woods, 282-3

Coal, 114-5, 164-5

Coldharbour Palace, 160

Colne, River, 240

Cookham, 279

Cooling Castle, 52-3

County Hall, 232-3

Cremorne Gardens, 343

Cricklade, 240

Crosby Hall, 159

Culham, 284

Cumnor, 243

Customs Officers, 115-6


Dagenham Breach, 70

Dagenham Dock, 71 Marshes, 68-71

Danes, 18, 33, 140-1

Defoe, Daniel, 36, 183-4

Dene-holes at Grays, 67-8

De Ruyter, 41

Dickens, Charles, 51, 52

Dockland, 24-6

Docks: Blackwall, 112-3 East India, 104 Execution, 102, 110 London,
110-1 Millwall, 112 Regent’s Canal, 111 Royal Albert, 113-4 St.
Katherine’s, 102, 105 St. Saviour’s, 102, 108 Surrey Commercial, 112
Victoria, 113 West India, 112

“Don Saltero,” 343

Dorchester, 265-6

Duke of Buckingham, 205

Dumouriez, 53

Durham Palace, 207

Dutch in the Medway, 42-5


Eastchurch, 35

East Ham, 113-4

East India Docks, 104

Edward the Confessor, 211

Eleanor of Provence, 153, 223

Embankment, The, 227-8

Estuary, The, 16-19, 31-39 defence of, 52

Eton College, 298-304

Evelyn, John, 41, 61-2, 186-90

Evenlode, River, 243

Execution Dock, 110-1


Fire of London, the Great, 159

FitzStephen, 145-7

Flamsteed, 99

Fleet River, 193-5 Street, 195

Fobbing, 60

Fort Grain, 35

Franklin, Sir John, 66

Frindsbury, 49

Fulham, 339


Godstow, 243

Goring Gap, 267-8

Gravesend, 52-6 proposed dam, 62-3

Grays, 67

Great Marlow, 281-2

Greenhithe, 21, 66

Greenwich, 87-100 Hospital, 92-7 Ministerial dinners at, 91
Observatory, 98-100 Royal births at, 89

Grey, Lady Jane, 175


Hakluyt, 90-1

Halley, 100

Hampton Court, 305-16

Harold, King, 143, 288

Henley, 280-1

Holiday Thames, 279-284

Houses of Parliament, 220-6

Howard, Katherine, 175-7

“Humphrey Clinker,” 342

Humphrey, Duke, 88

Hungerford House, 206


Iffley, 262

Isis, 239, 259

Isle of Dogs, 112 Grain, 35

Isleworth, 332


Jack Straw, 60

John Ball, 60

Jones, Inigo, 92


Kelmscott, 241

Kennet, River, 277

Kew Gardens, 333-5 Palace, 335

Kingston, 317-25

Knights of the Garter, 296-7

Knights Templar, 199-202


Lambeth, 344-7

Lechlade, 239

Legal quays, 102

Limehouse, 111-2 Basin, 111 Reach, Medway, 49

Llyndin Hill, 125, 130

London, a city of palaces, 157 and the Danes, 140-2 Fire of, 181-192
fires in, 25, 151, 181 fogs, 23 foundation of, 123-9 Friars in, 195-8
Hospitals, 233 in Norman days, 143-6 in Middle Ages, 157-65 in Roman
days, 130-6 in Saxon days, 137-40 Plague in, 183-4 reasons for position
of, 126-9 remains of Roman Wall, 133-6 Tower of, 166-80

London Bridge, 147-156 a great procession on, 155 a tournament on, 154
its dangers, 151 its relation to the City, 128-9

L.C.C. County Hall, 232

London Dock, 110-1

London Stone, Yantlet Creek, 35

Lower Reaches, 19-23


Macfarlane, Charles, 42

Maidenhead, 46

Marshes on banks, 16, 64-76

Mandeville, Geoffrey de, 171-2

Matilda, Empress, 170-2

Maud of Boulogne, 105, 171

Medway, River, 40-51

Merton, Walter de, 251

Millwall Dock, 112

Minster-in-Sheppey, 32

Monument, The, 181-2

Morris, William, 241-2

Mortlake, 338


New Bridge, 242

Nore Lightship, 15, 118

Northfleet, 65-6

Northumberland House, 207


Old Windsor, 287

Oxford, 246-262 Bodleian Library, 255 Castle, 256 Colleges, 251-5
founding of the University, 249-51 its origin, 247-8 Tom Tower, 254


Pangbourne, 279

Peasants’ Revolt, 60

Pepys, Samuel, 34, 77, 186

Peter of Colechurch, 148

Pett, Peter, 47

Pilots, 55

Placentia, Palace of, 89

Plague, the Great, 183-4

Pool, The, 26-8

Port Meadow, 243

Port of London, 23-6, 101-19 Authority, 15, 118-19

Port Victoria, 35

Princes in Tower, 171

Purfleet, 68

Putney, 338-9


Queenborough, 35

Queenhithe, 101


Radley, 284

Ranelagh Gardens, 343

Reading, 271-8 Abbey, 272-6 and the Civil War, 275 modern, 277-8

Regent’s Canal Dock, 111

Richmond, 326-31

River police, 116-8

Rochester, 49-51

Roding, River, 71-2

Roman remains in London, 132-5

Rosherville Gardens, 65

Rotherhithe, 113

Royal Albert Dock, 113-4 Victoria Dock, 113-4


Savoy Palace, 204-5

Saxon Kings crowned at Kingston, 319-20

“Scholar Gypsy,” 261-2

Scotland Yard, 207

Shadwell, 105

Sheen, 327

Sheerness, 34

Sheppey, 31-3

Shoeburyness, 37-8

Shooter’s Hill, 77-9

Silvertown, 114

Sion House, 332

Somerset House, 203

Sonning, 279-80

Southend, 36-7

St. James’s Park, 207

St. Katherine’s Dock, 102, 105

St. Paul’s Cathedral, 124, 188, 191, 211

St. Saviour’s Dock, 102, 108

St. Thomas’s Hospital, 233

Staple Inn, 159

Stephen, King, 170, 256, 267

Stow, 161, 179

Strand, The, 193

Streatley, 268

“Stripling Thames,” 237-45

Stroud, 49

Surrey Commercial Dock, 112

Swale, The, 41


Tea, 106

Teddington, 325

Temple Bar, 232 Church, 201 Gardens, 202

Temple, The, 199-203

Thame, River, 265

Thames Haven, 68

Thames Head, 237

Thames River, early tributaries of, 239 geology of, 267-70 locks
on, 243-5 material brought down by, 64-5 origin of, 2-5 reasons for
importance, 11-14 terraces of bed, 283-4 the basin of, 7-10 the
sources, 237-9 tunnels under, 113

Thorney Island, 130, 211-2

Tilbury, 57-63 Docks, 71, 104 Fort, 57 Elizabeth at, 57-8

Tower Bridge, 231

Tower of London, 166-80

Trewsbury Mead, 237-9

Twickenham, 325


Upnor Castle, 4


Vale of the White Horse, 241

Vauxhall Gardens, 341-3


Wallingford, 144, 266-7

Wandle, River, 340

Wandsworth, 339

Wapping, 108-10 Old Stairs, 108-10

Watling Street, 126, 130, 132, 144

Wat Tyler, 60, 156, 204

Waynflete, William, 299

West Ham, 113-4

West India Dock, 104, 112

Westminster, 209-226 the founding of, 210

Westminster Abbey, 212-9 Chapter House, 218 Confessor’s Chapel, 213
founding of, 212 Henry VII. Chapel, 215 Poets’ Corner, 215 Remains of
Old Abbey, 213 Tomb of Unknown Warrior, 218

Westminster Hall, 222 Palace, 220

Whitefriars, 197-9

Whitehall Palace, 207-8

Whittington, Dick, 165

Widths of the Thames, 15, 26

William and Mary, 92, 309

William the Conqueror, 73, 143, 256, 266, 285, 288

Windrush, River, 242

Windsor, 285-304 growth of Castle, 288-95 origin of, 287 Round Tower,
297 St. George’s Chapel, 296

Wolsey, Cardinal, 207, 253, 305

Woolwich, 77-86 Arsenal, 81-6 Dockyard, 80-1

Wren, Sir Christopher, 92, 228, 309, 312

Wykeham, William, 35, 293, 298


Yantlet Creek, 35

York House, 205


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN FOR WELLS GARDNER, DARTON AND CO., LTD.,
LONDON, E.C.




THE HISTORIC THAMES

[Illustration]


OXFORD

By Mrs. HAMILTON FYFE. Illustrated by L. RUSSELL CONWAY. 3s. 6d. net.


OXFORD

A Portfolio of Twelve Pictures of Oxford from Drawings by L. RUSSELL
CONWAY. 21s. net.


HAMPTON COURT

By Mrs. ADY (Julia Cartwright). 3s. 6d. net.


GREENWICH ROYAL HOSPITAL AND THE ROYAL UNITED SERVICE MUSEUM

By EDWARD FRASER, Author of “Bellerophon.” 3s. 6d. net.


WESTMINSTER ABBEY AND ST. PAUL’S CATHEDRAL

By the Rev. JOCELYN PERKINS and Mr. J. S. BUMPUS. With Illustrations
from Original Drawings by J. RUSSELL CONWAY and Photographs. 3s. 6d.
net.


THE LONDON MUSEUM

By F. J. HARVEY DARTON. Cloth. 3s. 6d. net.




SHAKESPEARE’S LONDON


THE BANKSIDE SHAKESPEARE

lets the children of London, the greatest city in the world, perform
what the greatest inhabitant of London wrote, saw, and did in his own
lifetime in his own way.


THE BANKSIDE SHAKESPEARE

allows children to use what the Government Committee on the teaching of
English calls “the best forms of theatrical amusement.”

TWELVE VOLUMES READY. 1s. net each.


WELLS GARDNER, DARTON & CO., LTD. 3 & 4. PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C. 4.
_And all booksellers._


Back end papers

[Illustration:

Map of the River Thames from Windsor to the Nore]

[Illustration:

Map of the River Thames to the Nore]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FATHER THAMES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
